A TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 103 of 1992 THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992 A BILL further to amend
the Constitution of India. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:— 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act,
1992. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint. 2. In article 323B of the Constitution, in clause (2),— (a)
sub-clauses (h) and (i) shall be re-lettered as sub-clauses (i) and (j), and before sub-clause (i),
as so re-lettered, the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— “ (h) rent, its regulation
and control and tenancy issues including the right, title and interest of landlords and tenants;”;
(b) in sub-clause (i), as so re-lettered, for the brackets and letter “(g)”, the brackets and letter
“(h)” shall be substituted; (c) in sub-clause (j), as so re-lettered, for the brackets and letter
“(h)”, the brackets and letter “(i)” shall be substituted. STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The operation of the Rent Control Legislations, as are today in various States, suffers from major
weaknesses and has led to various unintended consequences. Some of the deleterious legal
consequences include mounting and unending litigation, inability of the courts to provide timely
justice, evolution of practices and systems to bypass the operations of rent legislations and steady
shrinkage of rental housing market.

2. The Supreme Court, taking note of the precarious state of rent litigation in the country, in the
case of Prabhakaran Nair and others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu (Civil Writ Petition 506 of 1986 and
other writs) observed that the Supreme Court and the High Courts should be relieved of the heavy
burden of rent litigation. Tiers of appeals should be curtailed. Laws should be simple, rational and
clear. Litigations must come to end quickly. The idea of a National Rent Tribunal on an all-India
basis with quicker procedure should be examined.

3. It is proposed to amend article 323B in Part XIVA of the Constitution so as to give timely relief
to the rent litigants by providing for setting up of State-level Rent Tribunals in order to reduce
the tiers of appeals and to exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the Supreme
Court, under article 136 of the Constitution.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

NEW DELHI; The 23rd June, 1992. SHEILA KAUL. ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

323B. (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by
tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters
specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws. (2) The
matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:---

* * * *

(h) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) and
fees in respect of any of those matters; (i) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified
in sub-clauses (a) to (h).

* * * * *

* * * * *

(Tribunals for other matters.) LOK SABHA

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

________

(Smt. Sheila Kaul, Minister of Urban Development)