AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 3 of 2019

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH

AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth

Amendment) Act, 2019.

5

Short title and

commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification

in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be

inserted, namely:—

‘(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or clause

(2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from making,—

Amendment of

article 15.

2

(a) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker

sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and

(b) any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker

sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) in so

far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions

including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State,

other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of

article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to the existing

reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the total seats in each

category.

5

10

Explanation.—For the purposes of this article and article 16,

"economically weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State

from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic

disadvantage.’.

Amendment of

article 16.

3. In article 16 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be

inserted, namely:—

"(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision

for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically weaker

sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the

existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each

category.".

15

20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, the economically weaker sections of citizens have largely remained excluded

from attending the higher educational institutions and public employment on account of

their financial incapacity to compete with the persons who are economically more privileged.

The benefits of existing reservations under clauses (4) and (5) of article 15 and clause (4) of

article 16 are generally unavailable to them unless they meet the specific criteria of social and

educational backwardness.

2. The directive principles of State policy contained in article 46 of the Constitution

enjoins that the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests

of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the

Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

3. Vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5) was inserted

in article 15 of the Constitution which enables the State to make special provision for the

advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, or for the

Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to their admission in higher educational

institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of article 16 of the Constitution enables the State to make

special provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward

class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the

services under the State.

4. However, economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the benefit

of reservation.With a view to fulfil the mandate of article 46, and to ensure that economically

weaker sections of citizens to get a fair chance of receiving higher education and participation

in employment in the services of the State, it has been decided to amend the Constitution of

India.

5. Accordingly, the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Amendment) Bill,

2019 provides for reservation for the economically weaker sections of society in higher

educational institutions, including private institutions whether aided or unaided by the

State other than the minority educational institutions referred to in article 30 of the

constitution and also provides for reservation for them in posts in initial appointment in

services under the State.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

NEW DELHI;

The 7th January, 2019.

THAAWARCHAND GEHLOT

3

LOK SABHA

————

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

————

(Dr. Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)

MGIPMRND—3142LS(S3)—07-01-2019.