रजिस्ट्री सं० डी० एल० - 33004/95 REGISTERED No. DL-33004/95

भारत का राजपत्र The Gazette of India

असाधारण EXTRAORDINARY

भाग II—खण्ड 2 PART II—Section 2

प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

सं० 25] No.25] नई दिल्ली, बुधवार, मई 31, 1995/ज्यैष्ठ 10, 1917 NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MAY 31,
1995/JYAISTHA 10, 1917

इस भाग में अलग पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। Separate paging
is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

LOK SABHA _________

The following Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 31st May, 1995

BILL No. 43 OF 1995

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 1. This
Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1995. 2. In article 16 of the
Constitution, after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— “(4A) Nothing in
this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for reservation in matters of
promotion to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately
represented in the services under the State.” THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have been enjoying the facility of reservation in
promotion since 1955. The Supreme Court in its judgement dated 16th November, 1992 in the case of
Indra Sawhney and Others vs. Union of India and Others, however, observed that reservation of
appointments or posts under article 16(4) of the Constitution is confined to initial appointment and
cannot extend to reservation in the matter of promotion. This ruling of the Supreme Court will
adversely affect the interests of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Since the
representation of the Scheduled Castes and the Schedule Tribes in Services in the States have not
reached the required level, it is necessary to continue the existing dispensation of providing
reservation in promotion in the case of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. In view of
the commitment of the Government to protect the interests of the Scheuled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, the Government have decided to continue the existing policy of reservation in promotion for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. To carry out this, it is necessary to amend article
16 of the Constitution by inserting a new clause (4A) in the said article to provide for reservation
in promotion for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.

NEW DELHI; The 31st May, 1995.

SITARAM KESRI.

R. C. BHARDWAJ, Secretary-General.