AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON

24.1.1985

Bill No. 22 of 1985

THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTY-SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1985

A BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 101 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (a) of clause (3), for the words, brackets and
figures “clause (1) of article 102”, the words, brackets and figures “clause (1) or clause (2) of
article 102” shall be substituted.

3. In article 102 of the Constitution,—

(a) for the brackets, figure and words “(2) For the purposes of this article”, the words
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause” shall be substituted;

(b) the following clause shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so
disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.”

4. In article 190 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (a) of clause (3), for the words, brackets and
figures “clause (1) of article 191”, the words, brackets and figures “clause (1) or clause (2) of
article 191” shall be substituted. ### Main Text (Transcription)

Amendment of article 191. 5. In article 191 of the Constitution,— (a) for the brackets, figure and
words “(2) For the purposes of this article”, the words “Explanation.—For the purposes of this
clause” shall be substituted; (b) the following clause shall be inserted at the end, namely:— “(2) A
person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council
of a State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.”.

Addition of Tenth Schedule. 6. After the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Schedule
shall be added, namely:—

TENTH SCHEDULE

Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection

1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) “House” means
either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the
Legislature of a State; (b) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 or, as the case may
be, paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the members of that House for the time being
belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions; (c) “original political
party”, in relation to a member of a House, means the political party to which he belongs for the
purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2; (d) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule.

2. Disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3, 4 and 5,
a member of a House belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the
House— (a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or (b) if he votes
or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by the political party to
which he belongs or by any person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining,
in either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or authority; or (c) if he has
been expelled from such political party in accordance with the procedure established by the
constitution, rules or regulations of such political party.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,— (a) an elected member of a House shall be
deemed to belong to the political party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election
as such member; (b) a nominated member of a House shall,— (i) where he is a member of any political
party on the date of his nomination as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which he becomes, or, as the
case may be, first becomes, a member before the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes
his seat after complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up
by any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any
political party after such election.

(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins
any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after
complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, a person who,
on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House
(whether elected or nominated as such) shall,— (i) where he was a member of a political party
immediately before such commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph, to have been elected as a member of such House as a candidate set up by such political
party; (ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the House who has been elected
as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party for the purposes of
sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph or, as the case may be, to be a nominated member of the House
for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph.

3. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split.—Where a member of a House
makes a claim that he and any other members of his legislature party constitute the group
representing a faction which has arisen as a result of a split in his original political party and
such group consists of not less than one-third of the members of such legislature party,— (a) he
shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the ground that he has
voluntarily given up his membership of his original political party or has voted, or abstained from
voting, in such House contrary to any direction issued by such party or by any person or authority
authorised by such party in that behalf without obtaining the prior permission of such party, person
or authority or has been expelled from such party; and (b) from the time of such split, such faction
shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)
of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this paragraph.

4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger.—(1) A member of a House
shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party
merges with another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his original
political party— (i) become members of such other political party after such merger, or (ii) do not
become members of such other political party and remain members of his original political party.

(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1), a merger of a political party with another political
party shall be deemed to have taken place only if not less than two-thirds of the members of the
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger.

(3) Where a member of a House belonging to a political party which has merged with another political
party becomes a member of such other political party or, as the case may be, remains a member of his
original political party, he shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS The Constitution of India (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 was
enacted to strengthen the fabric of Indian parliamentary democracy by curbing the political
defections motivated by lure of office or other similar considerations. 2. The Tenth Schedule to the
Constitution which was inserted by the above Act provides for disqualification on the ground of
defection. It has been brought into operation on the 18th March, 1985. 3. The provisions of the
Tenth Schedule have been found to have certain loopholes which have been exploited to defect from
one political party to another without disqualification. 4. The present Bill seeks to remove some of
these loopholes. The Bill proposes to amend paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the Tenth Schedule. The main
amendments proposed are— (a) to provide that a member of a House shall be disqualified if he
voluntarily gives up his membership of his political party or if he votes or abstains from voting in
such House contrary to any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any
person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior
permission of such political party, person or authority; (b) to provide that a nominated member of a
House shall be deemed to belong to the political party of which he becomes a member before the
expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the requirements
of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188; (c) to provide that a person who, on the
commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether
elected or nominated as such) shall be deemed to have been elected as a member of such House as a
candidate set up by such political party or, as the case may be, to be a nominated member of the
House for the purposes of the Tenth Schedule; (d) to provide that the disqualification on ground of
defection shall not apply in case of a split in a political party if not less than one-third of the
members of the legislature party concerned constitute the group representing such faction; (e) to
provide that the disqualification on ground of defection shall not apply in case of a merger of a
political party with another political party if not less than two-thirds of the members of the
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger.

NEW DELHI; The 17th December, 1989.

R. VENKATARAMAN. (a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a
new political party formed by such merger; or

(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group,

and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as the
case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this
sub-paragraph. (2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the
original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if,
not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to such
merger.

5. Exemption.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who has been elected to
the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of
the Council of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State
or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be
disqualified under this Schedule,—

(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the membership of the
political party to which he belonged immediately before such election and does not, so long as he
continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a member of another
political party; or

(b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his membership of the political
party to which he belonged immediately before such election, rejoins such political party after he
ceases to hold such office.

6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection.— (1) If any question arises
as to whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the
question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of
such House and his decision shall be final:

Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the Speaker of a
House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision
of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.

(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question as to
disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in
Parliament within the meaning of article or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a
State within the meaning of article 212.

7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no court shall have
any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House
under this Schedule.

8. Rules.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule, and in
particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for —

(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if any, to which
different members of the House belong;

(b) the officer of the House with whom, and the manner in which, the constitution, rules and
regulations of such political parties and any amendments thereto and particulars of the
functionaries or other authorities of such parties for the time being exercising the power to expel
members thereof, may be filed;

(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to expulsion from, or admission
to, such political party of any members of the House and the officer of the House to whom such
reports shall be furnished; and

(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in subparagraph (1) of paragraph 6 including
the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for the purpose of deciding such question.

(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the House for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall
take effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with
or without modifications or disapproved by the House and where they are so approved, they shall take
effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case
may be, and where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.

(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions of article 105
or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have under this
Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made under this
paragraph may be dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.' STATEMENT OF
OBJECTS AND REASONS

The evil of political defections has been a matter of national concern. If it is not combated, it is
likely to undermine the very foundations of our democracy and the principles which sustain it. With
this object, an assurance was given in the Address by the President to Parliament that the
Government intended to introduce in the current session of Parliament an anti-defection Bill. This
Bill is meant for outlawing defection and fulfilling the above assurance.

2. The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to provide that an elected member of Parliament or a
State Legislature, who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and a nominated
member of Parliament or a State Legislature who is a member of a political party at the time he
takes his seat or who becomes a member of a political party within six months after he takes his
seat would be disqualified on the ground of defection if he voluntarily relinquishes his membership
of such political party or votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction of
such party or is expelled from such party. An independent member of Parliament or a State
Legislature shall also be disqualified if he joins any political party after his election. A
nominated member of Parliament or a State Legislature who is not a member of a political party at
the time of his nomination and who has not become a member of any political party before the expiry
of six months from the date on which he takes his seat shall be disqualified if he joins any
political party after the expiry of the said period of six months. The Bill also makes suitable
provisions with respect to splits in, and mergers of, political parties. A special provision has
been included in the Bill to enable a person who has been elected as the presiding officer of a
House to sever his connections with his political party. The question as to whether a member of a
House of Parliament or State Legislature has become subject to the proposed disqualification will be
determined by the presiding officer of the House; where the question is with reference to the
presiding officer himself, it will be decided by a member of the House elected by the House in that
behalf.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

NEW DELHI; The 23rd January, 1985. A. K. SEN.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

101. (1) * * * * * * * * *

Vacation of seats.

(3) If a member of either House of Parliament—

(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, or

(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case
may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b), if from information
received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker,
as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not
accept such resignation.

* * * * * * * * * * *

102. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House
of Parliament—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State,
other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;

(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State,
or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

(2) For the purposes of this article a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under
the Government of India or the Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either
for the Union or for such State.

* * * * * * * * * * * *

100. (1) * * * * * * *

Vacation of seats.

(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State—

(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 191; or

(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case
may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in subclause (b), if from information
received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker or the Chairman,
as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not
accept such resignation.

* * * * *

191. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State
specified in the First Schedule, other than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by
law not to disqualify its holder;

(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State,
or is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.

(2) For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under
the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason
only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.

* * * * * LOK SABHA

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Ashok Sen, Minister of Law and Justice.)