HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE

i

THE CONSTITUTION (FIRST
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1951

THE ESSENTIAL GOODS (DECLARATION
AND REGULATION OF TAX ON SALE
OR PURCHASE) BILL, 1952.
( REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE)

I•.•..
,'"

,

i

PARLIAMEMr SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI.
July. 1952.

May,1951

.-oat. 0' .,I.act 00111111," Phi>..a&ltW

.- ...

!O 'AIlUADft I I · JNl •

-

.'u.1ft.'.
....

Jo. fII. Po"
_I)

aDIl . .

.-

n-< .....•

.. a. ..,,,••_'-''0. efthe ....le
(10.8) B'U. lNO.

• • a-R.

Ie fte ,1DaD•• BtU. U61.

21- +-U.

4. T~ COn.t1'u'loL(Plr.' ,a~Adaent)
BtU. lI61.

. . '-61.

I.

lb. S'.'.

I'1Danolal 0.......
8111, lNl.

•

'10...

". 11&. Iar1ft OOWtS ••J.oa .111,UR.....

lO- 8-8.

16"-81.!

-de-

I

!

7. ft. I'o....zod
.I1U, lUG.

Oon'...o'. (Jlepla'loa). 10-, 8-61.

....- J

8. th. lad1_
.111, lNl.

aD- 8-&.

8- 8-11.,

CoII,..,•.c,s___'),/

:9. Ille b_•••
:
Bill, lNl.

l.'.r••'(a.paratloaj

• tbe ....r •• H1Dda Ual••~.I',
(Aa.Ddaen~) atu. lNl.

f

7· 1-11.

.

7- 8-el.

18- 8-11.

• lb.. A11&•• _aUla Uai.era1t;,
Cu_. . . ) BIU. 1Nl.

-0.-

~ the Pre ••(lnol'.-.ot to Crls.)/
. 1111, 1i51.

rI-e-R.

6-1O-e1.

M-

-de-

.'u, 1N8.

• the lllC!a.trle.(;JeY.lo,....' aad

Co,,'n1)

Ihe PlI.n'.\lon. LaDoor .111t1861~

r

111- 8-61.

r;.),\~~

,-61.

• - 1-61.

13-10-61 •

; j .
- , I 1~'

,
f

_______________._.._. ______- _____________._._. ___..________J
1.

i

..

.] •• -

•

I.

16. De DeW , ...1 ••• (R... l.1tloD
aU ""loa) . . . . ., ISll,lNl. 10-

11. til. . . . . . . '~....a •. ~~*. i"
A.clj ••'.e.nt) Sill, lHl.

.',

...

'r~

.-al. 12- '-11.

....

•

'THE~CONSTITUTION (FIRST AMENDMENT)

BILL,1951.

REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE.

We, the undersigned Members of the Select Committee, to which the
Bill to amend the Constitution of India was referred, have considered
:the Bill nnd have now the honour to submit this our Report, with the
Bill as amended by us annexed thereto.
Olause 2.-We agree with the principle underlying the amendment of
article 15(8) proposed in this clause.
We consider, however, that, for
"the sake of clarification, the scope of the amendment should be extended
to COver article 29(2) as well as article 15. We accordingly recommend
the addition of a new olause (4) to article 15.
In this clause, instead of
referring to "the educational, economic or social advancement of any
backward class of citizens", we think it preferable to refer to .. the advancement of any soc,ially and educationally baokward classes of citizens"
following the language used in article 840(1).

Some apprehensions have been expressed in respect to this amendment.
The Select Committee is of the view that this provision is not
likely to be, and -cannot indeed be, misused by any Government for
perpetuating any class discrimination against the spirit of the Constitution,
-or for treating non-backward classes as backward for the purpose of con~
ferring privileges on them.
I

Clause a.-Our discussions centred mainly round the proposed claus8
{2) of article 19. After considering several alternative forms, we havo
'oome to the conclusion that the only substantial change required in the
draft clause is the insertion of the word "reasonable" before the word
"restrictions".
This will bring clause (2) into line with clauses (3) to
(6), all of which refer to laws imposing "reasonable restrictions". Certain
.consequential drafting changes have been made in the clause.
We approve of the amendment .of article ~9(6) as proposed in sub·
clause (1) (b) of this clause. We approve also of the validating provision made in sub-clause (2), but suggest the omission of the las~ three
lines (immediately before the Explanation) whioh appear to be superfluous.

Clause 4.-We have made two amendments in the new Article 31A.
A proviso is added to clause (1) on the lines of clause (3) of Article 31 to
the e6ect that where the law is made by- a State Legislature, it. should
be reserved for the consideration of the President and should receive his
assent, before the law could claim the protection given to it by the new
Article.
Secondly, we have amended the definition of "estate'" to
-cover cases where "the existing law relating to land tenure" is in a
regional language, e.g., Hindi or Urdu, and uses the local equivalent of
"estate" .
Clau.se 5.-Although we understand that the last two lines of the
new Article 31B follow a time· honoured formula, we have suggested a
'Verbal change bringing out the intention without ambiguity.

I
OlaU868e to 14.-We apprOve of all these clauses as they stand, except"·
clauses 7 and 9.
It is necessary to provide in these two clauses for a..
case where the first session of Parliament 01', as the case may be, the
State Legislature, after a general election does not coincide with the first
session in that year.
In such cases also, there should be provision for
an address by the President or the (}ove1'llor, as the case may be. We
have suggested the necessary modifications ill clause 7(1) and clause gel).
2. The Dill was published in Part II-Section 2. of the Gazette of

India· on the 19th May, 1951.

8,- We think that the Bill has not been so- altered as to require
circulation under Rule 77(4) of the Rules of Procedure und Conduct of
Business jn Parliament, nnd we recolllmend that it be passed as now
amended.

J AWAHARLAL NEHRU
C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
B. R. AMBEDKAR
-G. DURGABAI
·H. N. KUNZRU

1\1. GAUTAM
·SYAMA PRASAD l\100KERJEE:
KHANDUBHAI K. DESAI
"HUKAM SINGH
UK. T. SHAH
L. K. BHARATI
R. K."SIDHVA
DEV KANTA BOnOOAB
A W ADHESHW AU PRASAD SINHA
MANILAL CHATURBAI SHAH
T. R. DEOGIRIKAR
RAJ BAHADUR
"NAZIRUDDIN AHMAD
V. S. SARWATE
K. HANUl\IANTHAIYA
SATYANARAYAN SINHA
NEW DELHI,

'Ike 25th May, 1951.

-

·Subject to a Minute of Dissent.
··Subjec~ to Minutes of Dissent.

3
MINUTES OF' DISSENT
I

Section 3, Clause (a) of the Constitution (First Amendment) Bill 1951,
amending Article 19 of the C'OIlSW utian hns been deviged to remedy the
sihlHtion 111'ising ffell:l the decision llf the Supreme Court which consi'dered
~hat while the right of peaceable assembly and the right of Hs.~oeitltion
gual'llnh>ed by nrtic1 e 19, clauses (b) and (c) may be restrictad under
clauses (3) and (4) of article 19 even in the interest of public order, nothing'
short of danger to the State and threat to its existence can justify curtuilment of the right of freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by
article .19. clause (a) of the Constitution. As it was not the intention
of the Constituent Assembly to formulate varying criteria -for permissible
legislation imposing restrictions on the fundamental rights enumerated
in article 19(1), it has become necessary to clarify the position by tbe
instant legislation which undoubtedly is well calculated to hchieve its
object.
2. '1'he opportunity for amending the constitutional guarant-ee in regard
to freedom of speech mflY, in my opinion, he availed of to invest Parliament alone, to -the exclusion of the State legislatures, with the power of
interfering. wh~n and to the extent necessary, with the fundamental
right of the citizen to freedom of speech and expression.
I feel thut
there is considerable force in the criticism that in regulating freedom of
speech and expression, uniformity of laws can be secured only if the
legi~lative decisions are taken by, Pa..rliaoment.
Further, the present
amendment authorises the curtailment of this freedom in the interest,
into" alia of friendly relations with foreign states which obviously is a: subject falling entirely and exclusively in the legiSlative ambit of the tTnion.
For these reasons it seems to me that it is eminently desirable to amenu
part (6) of sub-clause (I) of clause 8 so that clAUSe 2 of article 10
may read "Nothing in sub-clause (a) of dUllse (1) shall affect the operntion of any existing law in so far as it imposes or prevents the Parliament
from making any law .................. incitement to UD offence." The Rubstitution of t.he word "Parliament" for the word "State" in the place
indicated will ensure to Parliament the exclusive power of flhridging thl::'
fundamental right of freedom of speech in the plenitude of. its wisdom.
3. There is no basis for the argument that. the change hel'ein suggested

will entail any revision or interference with the Legislative Lists. Article
3138 dealing with the amendment of the Constitution specifically enume-

rates certain articles and chapters and other mutters which cannot be
amended except by more elaborate pro0eclml' of l'OtificAtion by not less
than one half of the States. It is significnnt that Chapter III on Fundamental Rights has been deliberately umith'd from this enumeration. It:g
also obvious that no clause on the Fundamental Hights con be amended
without restricting or enlarging the scope of the legisaltive power of
Parliament or the State legislatures. It is also wrong to think that
item 1 of the State List, viz. "Public order" has aoDY precise relation
to laws relating to freedom of speech and expression. The entire Criminal
Procedure Code of the Penal Code nre comprised within that item and
to argue that a minor restriction on this legislntive power amounts to
an interference with the legislative List.s does not seem to be reasonable
at all. The scope of item 1 in the State List will continue to be nearly
as large as it is to-day. It is wrong to argue that th~ scope of .Parliament
can be restricted or enlarged without at the same tune enlarglDg or re8-

4
tricting the scope of the State iegislatures. 'l'here are many instances
in the Fundamental Rights where Parliament is given exclusive jurisdic·
tion, as for instance in 16(3).
4. On the other hand, to include the new items, public order and maintenance of friendly relatIOns with foreign States, does justify the apprehension that these extensions may result in serious encroachments of the
librety of person and press, espeoially at the time of Elections. 'fhere are
going to be tens of thousands of polling stations and even after the General
Election, there will be about 100 by-elections every year. It will be
open to any State legislature to abridge the freedom of the press and the
public Hud then take the chance of being overruled by Parliament.
5. No other reason oan be or has been assigned for opposing this sugges·
tioll which, I believe, will go a long way towards allaying public apprehensions, so vigorously and vehemently voiced by powerful sections of the
Press, that the extensive power of control over the fundamental right of
freedom of speech and expression might be abused by some of the Stats
legislatures. There is no more effective remedy for dispelling such
apprehensions @tan the cOflferment upon Parliament of the exclusive· right
to exercise that control in the manner suggested by me Bupra.
NEW DELHI;

G. DURGABAI.

The 25th May, 1951.
II
After tt (oUl't'lul consideration of all the arguments put forward by 1rovernment in support of this Bill set-king to hIDend certain articles of the
Constitution. I think that Government have not established any clear aud
convinoing case for the proposed amendments. The constitution has betlD
in force only for sixteen months and in a few months, the general elections
will take Villue bringing a new Parliament into existence. Yet Government propose to force these ameniments to the Constitution through Parliament immediately.
2. It is 8. matter of deep regret that Government should not have given
the Committee full information with regard to the laws that had become
void as a result of the recent judicial pronouncement and that are to be
validatecl IInder dause 3(2) of the Bill though they were rcpeatedly &sked
to place before the Committee a clear picture of the position created by the
decisions refeHed to obove.
3. In the course of the discussion on the Bill, Government referred to
the cases of Brij Bhushan VB. The State of Delhi, Ramesh Thapar V8, the
Stnte of l\bdras and Master Tara Singh VB, the State of Punjab as showing
the need for an immed;ate amendment of the Constitution. The Supreme
Court dc'cided in the first case thllt the pre-censorship of news to be published in a newspaper was inconsistent with the right to freedom of speech
and expression gU6runteed by article 19 of the Constitution and in the
second thllt orders banning the entry and circulation of tI newspaper in ~
state in the interest of public order was equally unconstitutional.
4. Is it the intention of Government to validate the exercise of these
power" by the State? Hestrictions like these were imposed only during
the war under the Defence of India Rules. The authorities can exercise
no suqh powers in the U. S. S. whose constitution guarantees the right
of free speech ,flO its citiz.ens. There is no. reason why they should be
allowed 111 Indm to exercISe such powers, WhlOh were not exercised even
during the Britieh regime in peace time.,

IS

5. In Master Tara Singh's case, the East Punjab High Court declared
12·U and J53A of the I. I'. C. void in accordlmce with Adticle 19 of the
Constitlltion. The history of Section 124A is weH known. It was passed
in its present form in 1898 to curb the activities of Indian patriots. While
in Ellglllnp sedition is treated as a minor offence, in India it is regarded
as a major offence for which sevel'e punishment clIn be imposed. Now tha~
Indir.' is free it should find no place in an statute book in its existing form.

a. I think that the introduct:on of the word "reasonable" before the
word "restrictions" in Article 19(2) introduces a very important change in
the original draft. It places in the hands of the judicia,ry the power tl)
determine whether a restrictive piece of legislation is reasonable or not.
T~e, ~ide language of the proposed amendment to Article 19(2) is open to
crItICIsm but I do not want to lengthen this minute by referring in detail
~o all those points to which objection can
be taken, in view of the
Important change referred to above.
7. Sub·clause 2 of Clause 8 of the Bill validates retrospectively the luws
that had become void on the ground of their inconsistency with sub-clause
(a) of clause 1 of Artjcle 19 of the Constitution. Government should
give an assurance that no one will be prosecuted for havinv acted in
contravention of these laws while thE'y were invalid.
In regard to the proposed amendment to Article 15 of the Constitution:
I think that a central authority should determine whioh olasseEl should be
regarded as backward so that a uniform standard may be observed in
respect of the specification of such classes pending the report of the Commission referred to in article 340 of the constitution. A provision similar
to the one contained in articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution is necessary to enable the President to decide which classes should be regarded
as backward.
H. N. KUNZRU.
NEW DBJ.HI;

The 25th May, 1951

III
The Consti~ution of Indio. was framed by the Constituent Assembly
after several vears of devoted lsbom lind deliberations. It has been
given a trial only for ] 6 months. I do .not. suggest for Il mo!ne,nt that
under no ciroumstances should the ConstitutIOn b::> amended wlthm suoh
a short period. In fact, so far as the amendment relates to any formal
matters, there oan be no serious objection t,ci the same. But the onus of
proving the imperative need for making fundamental changes lies heavily
on the propos(ll's of such, changes. 'fhat OIlUS, in my opinion, has not
been satisfactorily disoharged in the present case. The procedure adopted
indicates how the Constitution iA being denied its inherent sanctit~· and
~Qcredness. The main reason given for altering the provisions is that the
Judiciary has pronounced its opinion on some articles affecting the
validity of certain laws-opiniolls which are dis-favoured by the Government 'in power. Incidentully, We have not been fllrni~hed, th?ugh we
repeatedly ask.ed for it, with ,a l.ist o~ such laws WhICh, havmg been
declared invahd, have created difficultIes for Government. We have
deliberately clothed the Judiciary with the duty of ensuring .that our laws
do conform to the Constitution. It is essential that nothmg should be

6
done to impair the independence of the Judicia.ry, or to lower its prt.>stige.
Government is too impatient even to wait for the verdict of t,he Supreme
Court, aQd the novel procedure has been followed in declaring several·la.ws
as valid under the Constitution which High Courts have pronounced as
void or unconstitutional. In our country, l1nder the old regime many laws
were formulated which were repre-sHive and retrograde in charncter. Their
object in many cases was to rt'~strict freedom of the individual, or of the
Press. Government has mnde no effort to revise these laws. On the
other hanel, wo have m('anwhiJe pagsed our Constitution which guarantees
..,ertain fundamental rights to all citizens. Ins.tead of amending the
"lawless laws", and making their provisions consistent with the fundamental rights, we Bre following the strange procedure of adhering to such
reactionar;y laws and changing our fundamental rights so as to make such
laws valid and constitutional. Chunges in fundamental rights affecting
freedom of speech and expression have been proposed, curtailing them in
material respects. To do so without giving the public the fullest opportunity to express their views thlweon, aud to hurry the enactment through
at t.he Iug end of Parliament's life, when ufter six months the first General
Elections under the new Constitution will be held,_ naturally give rise to
seriolls misgivings in public mind and are considered improper Bnd
arbitrary.

2. Article 19.-The addition of the word "reasonable" before 'restrictions' in 19(2) is a very wholesome cha.nge. It makes 19(2) justiciable
and I do not wish to minimise the importance of this change ill the protection of civil liberty in this country.
3. Fundamental rights Bre never absolute anywhere. There are limitations flowing from the citizens' obligations and duties without which
orga.nised society cannot function. But these limitations should never be
such as to take away the substance from these rights or to curb tho
expression of free opinions of the people, which is the very essence of
a really democratic Government. The tyranny of laws sponsored by a
majority party may be as oppressive as those arbitrarily imposed by a
depot. Fundamental rights act as a deliberate check to this tendency.
From this viewpoint, the existing limitations on freedom of speech and
expression, as provided in the Constitution, are more' than sufficiently
restrictive and no fresh addition to them is justified. The only lacuna
which may be thought to exist in the provisions of fundamental rights is
that thll limitations do not cover incitement to violence. If this is a
lacuna, it mH~· be removed, but beyond this there is no justification for
forging fresh fetters. Incitement to any offence is of the widest connotation and may be abused by any Government to curb honest expression
of views. The terms "security of the state" and 'public .order' have been
added and left undefined in the amendment, thus further restricting the
liberty now given. "Public Order" should be definitely subject to the
"clew.- and present danger test", that is "the substantive evil must be
extremely serious and the degree of imminence extremely high". This
is the accepted interpretation of the term "Public Order" every where,
particularly in the United States of America.
4. There is no justification for bringing. in the unrestricted provision of
"friendly relations with foreign states" which .is too wide a term and may
include any act,s or expression of free opinion adversely affecting foreign
statelS. fril'ndly Hlld ullfriendl~·. At the most. the phl'Sse should not extend
beyond defamatory attacks on heads of foreign states or similar acts.

7
'.Government agrees to this principle but is not prepared to make it clear
(Iud ullambiguous in the COllstitutioll itself .

.

5. It should not be forgotten that many of the law-making powers- mny
be exercised by the State Legislatures on matters affecting people's l'ights
and liberties. 'l'here may thus be conflicting approaches in different states,
influenced by loeHl considerations at t,he will of t,he mlljority pHrty. These
laws, at least those relating to restrietion of fundamental rights, should
,be framed by Parliament and not by the State Legislatures.
6. Retrospective effect is bt;ing given to the laws that ht1\'e been d~­
,elared inconsistent with Artielc 19, of the Constitution.
This is most
undesirable, Bnd may theoretically clo£he Government with the authority
to launch prosecutions for alleged offences, committed during a period
when the laws were void according to decisions of Courts. Both the Prime
Minister and the Home Minister have assured that this is not Government's intention and instructions would be issued to the State Governments
accordingly, if necessary. Still, the dangerous implication. of such retrospective provision cannot be minimised.

7. Article 81(A) and Article 31(B).-Both these articles relate to acquisition of estates. Article 31 of .the Constitution gave rise to bitter controversy when it was under discussion. The policy ultimately approved was
to the effect that private property could not be expropriated and that
~cquisition of property could be mude on payment of compensation which
-should be settled by 1e.w. The amount of compensation, or the principles
on which compensation ~hould be paid, or the manner in which payment is
iio be made were l~ft to be decided by legislative enactment according to
Article HI. It was further laid down that such laws would require the
President's assent. Since the pRssing of the Constitution, several State
Legislatures have enacted Juws for the abolition of znmindari. Only one
1)£ such laws has been declared invalid by the High Court of Patna, not
for Ilny infringement of Article 31. but for violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution. Obviously, the appropriate course in such a case must be
for Government to appeal to the Supreme Court, and find out if the said
law was actually unconstitutional. If the Supreme Court gave a verdict
which Government was not prepared to accept on the groun(I that it was
.a violation of the basic principle of acquisition of property for public pur·
poses as laid down in the Constitution, there could have been a- justification
for amending the Constitution in order to make the point at issue clear
beyond Ilny doubt. Without doing this, Article 31(A) seeks to validate all
future laws even though they may be inconsistent with the provisions in
the entire chapter dealing with fundamental rights. Nothing has as yet
happened which would justify our taking away the jurisdiction of the
Judiciary in this sweeping. manner. Even if it is considered necessal'!
"that the Judiciary should have no voice with regard to the laws for abohtion of zamindaries, the wording of Article 81(A) I!Ihould be suitably modified and the responsibility for ensuring the compliance with the provisions
-of Article 31 in respect of this class of property should at least be vested
in the President. This will at least be some guarantee that the State
Legislatures follow Q uniform policy in accordance with the principles laid
down under Article 31 which is not proposed to be abrogated.
8. Regarding Article 31(B), it appears that some of the laws sought to
be validated are today pending before the Judiciary. To include particular
laws in the Constitution itself as vnlid, which have been deliberately

8
declared to be invalid and unconstitutional is an extraordinary procedure~ .
These laws should at least be carefully tested by the President once again
with a view to ensuring that none of them violates the provision~ of the
Constitution, and only after thIs has been done, should the laws be deolared
valid. This alone can give the President the constitutional right to seourean amendment of such laws, where such amendment is called for in order
to make them conform to our Constitution.
9. 1£ we have a written Constitution und Fundumental Rights, as
indeed we huve solemnly and deliberlltely ohosen to have, we have to abide
by their provisions. No Government oan afford to brush them aside or
hurriedly seek their alterations simply on the plea that judioial interpretations and decisions are not to its liking. A better and more honourablecourse would have been not to have a written Constitution at all and makeParliament the supreme body.
SYAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE.
NEW DELm;

The 25th May, 1951.

IV
We regret we are unable to agree with our colleagues on the Select
Committee for reasons given below, and have, aooordingly, felt ourselve!Joompelled to write this Minute of Dissent.
2. Parliament having acoep~d the prinoiple of the amending Bill, and,
referred it ~o ~e ,S.eleot Oommittee to consider the specific amendments,
i~ is llot open, at this stage, to question the propriety of making amendments in the basic Constitution of the country. At the present moment
that Constitution has been in opera~ion for hardly 16 months. During
this brief period while, the Constitution, or rather some speoifio articles,
thereof, may have come up for interpreta.tion or udjudication by the
proper constitutional authority ,-the J udioiary-charged under the
Constitution, with that function. But the GxperimlCe gained of the
Constitution in operation is too short, and the difficulties noticed are too
few to warrant the conclusion, implicit in the Bill, that particular articles
of the Constitution need amending.
3. But even if we do not,-as, indeed, under the prevailing Parliamentary conventions, we oannot,-question the principle of the, amending.
Bill, we cannot persuade ourselves, either as to the urgency of the
measure,-and the consequen~ haste with which it is being rushed through
all stages of legislative business in Parliament,-or even as ~o the advisability of the present Parliament, the successor of the Constituenj
Assembly, to deal with and dispose of the measure, in the manner iu.
which it is now proposed to be done.
4. We do not, indeed, question the oompetence, technically speaking,
of this Parliament to undertake, and, if so minded, to pass this legislation. For we realise that, under article 379 of the Constitution, until both
Houses of Parliament have been constituted and summoned to meet for
the first session the body functioning as the Constituent Assembly of ~e­
Dominion (now Republio) of India, immediately before the oommencement
of the Constitution (26th January, 1950), is deolared to be the provisional'
~arliament, with alL 'the powers and duties of an ordinary Parliament,..

p.
as laid down in the Constitution. And, under article 368, Parliament is.'
empowered, with a given procedure and under certain conditions, to 8mtlnd
the Constitution. These two articles, read together, leave no room fordoubt as to the -competence, technically speaking, of the present Parliament to introduce, consider and pass any amendment of the Constitu'ion,
it thinks necessary, subject to the procedure and reservations presl:ribed
in article 388 in that behalf. But, for these very reasons, it is only untechnical competence of this Parliament which we cannot question. But
that does not prevent our pointing out that it is a unicameral body, elected
indirectly, five years ago, by a limited electorate, itself chosen on a very
limited franchise.
5. While, however, we do not question the technical competence ot
this Parliament to deal with this Bill, we have grave doubts and misgivings as to the wisdom, the propriety and the justification for this Bill.
taken as a whole, or its various clauses individually. As indicated above,
this Parliament, though technically successor of the Constituent Assembly,.
expressly vested with all the powers and duties of that booy in its Legis·
lative as well as Constitution-making aspects, is a materially difteren~­
entity. It was elected indirectly over five years ago, on nothing like
Adult Suffrage, which is to be the basis of representation for the Parliaments of the future. It has thus nothing like a direct speoific me.n!latefrom the people for this purpose, even though the body whom it has
succeeded was elected for Constitution-making. Not having any mandate from the Sovereign .People, it may well be asked what authority, or
opportunity, it has had to test or ascertain public opinion on this subject.
Such elections as have taken place in the il\tervaI.-[Numerically, they
were quite a large number, changing almost one-third of the House in·
1950, and a still larger proportion since., because of deaths, resignations,
and other similar causes] ,-have been indirect; and that, too, by the
States' Legislatures, themselves elected on a very limited franchise, fiveyears ago. The claim of this Parliament to be representing public sentiment on the subject today, is thus rather slight. No such opportunity to·
ascertain public opinion can, in fact, occur until the first General Elections, under Adult Franchise, as prescribed by the Constitution, take place.
This direct method of ascertaining public sentiment on such crucial
matters of vital importance is thus unavoidably lacking.
6. Parliament. moreover, is, today. a unicameral body, and not tho
full organisation contemplated under the Constitution, which may justly
claim to represent popular, as well as the States' collective. opinion and
interests. Amendment of the Constitution, even by a full, normal,
bicameral Parliament, is hedged round with conditions and reservations,.
which, under the circumstances of the moment, cannot really operate.
This makes the present attempt at amendment open to question on
grounds of propriety, if not of constitutionality. The attempt made in.
Parlia,&nent, while the motion for reference of this Bill to the Select Committee was under consideration, was defeated. That cha.nnel of a.scertaining public opinion was thus also blocked, incidentally revealing a desire.
on the part of the sponsors of the Bill. to hurry through the measure,
which is not in consonance with Parliamentary tradition. the conventions.
of democratic government, or the demands of popular sovereignty.
7. It must also be remembered that not all the present -Members of
Parliament,-perhaps not even a majorUy,-were members of t·he Cons~ituent Assembly which framed, discussed and passed the Constitution...

10
now under process of amendment. They cannot have, presumably, the
·same appreciation of the several Articles, clauses and sub-clauses, and of
their implications which those who took part in those discllssions way claim
to have. To seek to amend the COllstitution, in some of its fundameptal
provisions and vital Articles, in a body thus composed and circumstanced,
-and at a time when the Elections are hardly six months away,-is we
cannot help teeling, hardly in the best traditions of constitutionRI progress, democratic ideals, 01' effective popular sovereignty. While, again,
the Constituent Assembly was functioning for making the Constitution,
l Party whips and instructions were wisely kept out.
Today, however, th~)
Parliament functions in the full sway of the Party machine; and it needs
I but to point out this f!let to show that the Amendments now proposed,
if passed, would not have been in tune with the spirit and tradition of
the Constituent Assembly.
I

8. The Select Committee, like the HOUSe' before it, hRd not, we may
add, all the necessary material on which the need to mnke these amendnlt'nt8 is supposed to' be based. ·~N e had not before us the text of all the
laws which We a.re called upon, in this Bill, to keep alive, or permit being
mnde without fear of being declared invalid under the Constitution. We
had not even any COny of th .. Press Laws Bnquiry Committee Report
before us, even though some of the most crucial of these amendments,
relate to the Freedom of Speech a.nd Expression, and, incidentally, of
-thePl'e"s in India. And though we have been furnished copy of a Bibliography on Fundamental Rights, and some points. or extracts from .Tudgement~ of the Supreme Court and of some of the High Courts calling in
,question the laws made by Parliament or by some State Legislatures,
We have had no time to study the text of these judgements, and compare
the line taken by our Supreme Judiciary, or the High Courts, with the
-correc;ponding pronounoemrnts in other countries where they have had
similiar problems to face under their own written constitutions. Under
these circumstances, it becomes impossible to assess the validity of the
-claim that, because of these judgements particular Articles in the Constitution, passed only 16 months ago, need to be amended.

9. Not only had we not sufficient material to assess for ourselves the
necessity and justice of this attempt to amend the Fundamental Rights
·of the citizens, we had no explanation of any convincing character for
thnt purpose from the sponsors of the Bill.
'I'he Statement of Objects
and Rensons is a bald summary of' certain facts Rnd events which have
·cast doubt on the meaning of ~ertain Articles, not a satisfying explane.tion of the consequent need to hasten with these amendments. The
speeches accompanying the motion for reference to Select Committee
went, no doubt, a little further, at least from the standpoint of the
sponsors of the Bill. But Ulose speeches We feel, made out no case for
these drastic and radical amendments. We cannot conceal from our-.selves,-that this Bill is not an ordinary piece of routine legislation for
administrative convenience, for which the only justification necessary
would be administrative difficulties actually encountered' that need to be
removed. This is a Bill for amendment of the Constitution in some of its
most vital parts, affecting the fundamental freedoms of the citizens,
which the Constitution has delibrrntely placed outside the ordinary business of Pllrliament. 'Ve must, therefol'P, rpcord o\lr (;onviction t,hat
-there ill neitherfollndatiol1 !lor justification arldnced by the sponsors of
·this measure for attempting to effect such ran.ictl1 change!'! in Ollr Funda.mental Rights, limiting, if not denying, them in material pnrticulars.

II
10. Because of these considerations, we find that .the individual
'alause,s of the Bill offend ug:tinst our basic convictions.
Clnuse 2, for
instance, amends Article Ili perrnittiug special facilities being provided
for thl:' educational, or !>ocial ndVHIICp.ment of Any backword clas:o;es of
citizens. No definition is gi,'p.n of theRo .. hackw'£\l'd classes" not e\'en
that indicated in Articles 340-341 und 2:34 of the Com4itutioJI. '1'his WAS
necessitated, we are told, becIIUI;c th.' Supremc! Court held that the socalled COrnrrmlltll (}. O. of the !\ladl'l18 Go\'t>rnment was ultra vire8.· 'Ve
llave no desire to stand ill the way of Ule educational, social. or economic
adV'tneenHlnt pf the so-pulled "Backward Classes ".
But. from the
standpoint of all the criteria mentioned in the clause, India. may well
claim to he it lund of bnekward dti7.ens.\\Tot'(~ than two thirds of 0111'
population has not enough to eat, or clotbe or shelter themselves, let
alone the other fundamental wRnts of mall, in respect of moral growth or
cultural development. '1'he Constitution has provided a whole Chapter
cf Directivefl of Policy. which, though not justiciable, is aitnt'd at improving steAdily the lot of the average citizen, and make up for the heavy
deficit from which he suffers to-day. The clause as agreed to in the
Select Committee leaves out economic conRiderations and speaks of
, .ed lIcationully and socially backward classes", which would needlessly
rivet attention upon one of the most deplorable features of our social
system. We consider that to be objectionable as being incompatible
with the letter and spirit of the Constitution. Those in power and
authority have, however, done nothing hitherto to implement any important Article in the Chapter on Directives of Policy which breathes the
spirit of the Constitution, even though somewhat asthmatically. And
while this deficit of the entirf' population remains unremedied.. certain
so-calleel "Backward Classes" have to be selected, and the Constitution
is proposed to be amended to enable State' Governments to pass legislation calculated to make lip for such deficiencies in some selected sections
of the community. The guiding principle furnished by reference to
Articles 340-342, also, would not prove adequate to realise the bAsic aims
of the f'onstitution,-the objectives stated in the Pl'eamble,-when and
whl>r8 the full fury of Party regime is established, Incidentally, we may
add that the scope of the amending Bill is substantially widened by including reference to Article 29(2), which is nowhere mentioned in the
Original Bill.
11. Fa.!' more objectionable, however, is the proposed
amendment to
Article 19, relating to certain fundamental freedoms of the citizen. Tl?e
Article, as it stands in the Oonstitut.ion does not declare and guarantee the
freedoms enumerated therein in a categorical form. Each f!'eedom is limited
of a like
or qualified in a manner unparalleled in other Constitutions
oharact.er. But even these reskictions or limitations pa!e iniiQ insignificance
when one considers those now proposed. At least three new categories of
restrictions have been introduced; while those already in the Article have
been, in some respects, materially modified. The need to 8afeguard "friendly
relations with foreign States" is made the principal excuse for
the most
considerable and novel of these limitations; and the claims of "public order"
or "incitement to offence" have been specifically added to curb the freedom
of speech and expression, including. incidentally and inevitably, the Freedom
of the P.!'ess .. In the amendment. as it now stands, the term "reaFonable"
is added before "restrictions". To this extent, there is a welcome improvement made by the Select Committee over the original draft,. We see however no justifieution for including' "friendly relations" with fm'eign state~ to
restrict, however reasonably freedom of thought and expression even though

12
in a given case the press or publicists o!' other States may not show similar
solicitude to maiutain friendly relations with us. The press in India, 'as Q
whole, has shown no evidence to justify this wholly gratuitous
and unwarrantable restriction on civil liberties. No re~Co!'ence is made to any provithis
sion by way of reciprocttl agreements for mutual accommodation in
behalf which might have lent a colour I)f reasona.bleness to this proposal. No
argument is also given to Elhow why the Press or publicits of India should not
be trust.ed to observe all reasonable restraint in dealing with such matter!',
or, if they fail to do so, to be dealt with unde.!' the ordinary !aw of the land.
We think, therefore, that even in its modified form, there is no justification
for thus limiting the most impo!'tant, of the Civil liberties, characteristic of a
modern, progressive, free democracy.

12. We fear likewifoe, that the term "public order" is much too wide, and
may open the door to much greatCo!' restriction of this elementary freedom
than appears on the surface.
13. The term "incitement to offence" is likewise, much too wide not tobe
objected to by those who desire as we do, the minimum of restriction on our
basic civil liberties.
14. We would, in this connection, invite attention to that other feature of
the amending BiI!, which seeks to keep alive existing laws that might have
offended against the Constitution, and pe..."1llits the making of new laws in a
similar direction. Not. all the laws which might conceivably offend against
the Constitution,-against this Part in particular,-have been neither listed,
nor placed before us. The provisions of Article 372 of fhe Constitution have
yet to be carried out but the proposed Amendment would not wait for any
proper consideration of the need 01' justification of the laws passed under 1\
foreign regime, and their adaptation, if so considered necessary; but would
summa.!'ily keep alive all the Rundry of Fuch laws. Most of these laws have
also not been pronounced upon by the Supreme, or even by any High Court.,
Under thrse
as offemling against the Constitution, or A,ny part of it.
circuUlst.ances, to make a sweeping amendment, of this kind
is neither
expedient, nor advisable.
25. Some of UB have their own views to submit· on other pa,!'ticulA.r clauses,
with which, therefore, We shall not burden this Note. But we canllot but
draw attention t,o the ('h~nge maclf> in the Select Committee, in the proposed
new Article 31A which addR a proviRion tc clause (1) on the lines of Clause
(3) of Article 31. While slIch special consideration is shown to owners of
landed property, viz. rpserving a Rill for consideration by the President, and
for his Assent, if it st~eks to abolish land-ownership or corresponding rights
in lRnd, no such considerntion will be !'Ihown for any Bill aimed at, restricting
civil liberty, particulady in mgnrd to Freedom of Epeech and Expression. We
think this makes too invidiom; a discrimination not to demand seriousattention of 'Parliament, if only because it violat.es, by implication at least, the
basic spirit of the Constitution which promises equality before the law to all
oitizens.
K. T. SHAH.
NAZIRUDDIN AHMAD.
'RUKAM SINGH.

NBW DELHI;
. The 25th May, 1951.

.1S
\~

I have signed a general note of dissent jointly with Professor K. T. S.hah
and Mr. Nazir-ud·Din Ahmed.
But there are certain details on which
1 have my own views. and which I must necessarily deal in a separate
note.
2. I cannot agrea to the present form of amendment of Article 19(2). It
is too wide, and the abridgment of freedom of speech would be very
material and extensive.
When the Constituent Assembly framed the
COllstitution we were so gel1erOU8 as to allow full freedom except when
the security of the State wus endangered 01' its overthrow was threatened.
After the framing of the Constitution we should have enacted fresh legislation in conformity with the spirit of our Constitution.
The old antiquate~ laws continued to be on the S'tatute Book.
The Constitution
was t.) be the touch stone with which our Laws were to be llcrutinised.
They were tested and found faulty.
A,nd naturally so &8 we had been
clamouring against them that they unjustifiably restricted our liverties ..
The natural consequence ought to have been that we should haveanacted
our laws in the spitit of our Constitution and in accordance with the
judicitd interpretations. But we are doing just the reverse.
As the old
reactionary laws come into conflict with the constitution and both cannot
pull together constitution must be changed to adopt itElelfto those laws.
3. The insertion of the word "reasonable" is welcome and provides
the Courts an opportunity to scrutinise whether any restriction imposed
abridges the freedom to an unjustifiable extent.
But the scope of
limitations is much too wide.
In the interest of "the security of the
State", "friendly relations with foreign States," and "public order" as
well as "incitement to offence" are too general terms and the circumstances existing or the experience gained do not warrant such abnormal
changes.
4. The amendment proposed in article 15(3) indirectly amends article
29(2) as it restricts the scope of the latter.
In my opinion this was
beyond the scope of the Select Committee.
It would have been more
proper to amend 29(2) and leave article 15 as it was.
Any how the

present amendment would 10a\'e very wide scope to the State Legislatures and consequently to the Executives to corrupt the list of backward
olasses by including groups that were not backward.
Political considerations would defeat the ultimate objective, and the really deserving
persons, intended to be benefited, may not get the full advantage.
5. Though in principle I agree to the State carrying on business or
trade to the exclusion of citizens I am afraid this would give powers to
the State Legislatures to pass laws that may not be in consonance with
the spirit of the Constitution.
We are committed so far to the principle
of acquisition of property with compensation.
:But cases have been
fought in Uttar Pradesh and Bombay where it has been alleged that the
property was acquired without paying any compensation.
To take one
instance of transport the operators were denied the right to carry on their
trade but their vehicles and other property necessary for the carrying on
the trade was not taken over on the pretext that they were free to use
their vehicles. That was a device to get over the clear provisions of law.
The operat-ors could not use their vehicles and were suddenly thrown I)ut
of the trade though technically no tangible property of theirs had been
tiCqUirOd. B~d so they could be refused
any compensation. The High

14Courts Of Bombay and Allahabad had given cert·ain reliei .to such sufferers
but now under the present amendment they would be completely out of
Court and would be left entirely at th~ ll1~rcy of the Exeeutive.
Again
in clause 4(2) a definition of the word 'Estate' has been given.
The
objeet is ti) do away with the interrilediaries. But iu Punjab the wod
'Estate' meallS filly area of land for whicil n sepu~aLt\ Il'l:urd (J£ rights if.!
kept.. S,) all lands, however small in area and without ally interI.!1c:ctiaJ':(;S
at all, could be taken o\,er if the I'unjHb Legisl:tture wos so minded. But
this ,"'us rlOL the intention of the Const·itl.ltion.
~EW DELHI;

The 25th ;1[ ay, 1951.

HUKAM SINOR.

VI
1. Besides the general oonsiderations for dissent advanced in the Note
I havd signed with my other colleagues, I would like to invite attention
to the invidious discrimination, implicit in the chsnge made by the Select
Committee in Clause 4 of the amending Bill. That Cla.use· adds Article
alA by which it would be possible to exclud.e the jurisdiction of the Courts
in regard to the question of compensation to land-owners while abolishing
their rights in land. Though the original Article 31 refers both to the
landed as will as the personal wealth in commerce or industry, by the new
Article, the term " Estate" is defined restrictively, and 80 confined to
propr:etoriul or analogous rights in land, including subinfeudutory rights.
The dt'fiuition is not exten:led to personal or movable property, which [,Iso
may have to be socialised. The presence of private property rights in land
block radical agarian reform the same way as private property operated
under the profit motive block industrial and social reform. If land ownership creates a class of parasites exploiting the natural resources of the
country for private benefit, aud yet to obstruct improvement in agricultural
technique and increase'll production, individual ownership of productive
industry seryice or untilities exploits even more effectively the workers
<engaged in ,such industry utilities or services, and at the snme time, stlmd ill
the way of planned co-ordination, modernisation and rationalisation of
industry, which may be expected under sooialised ownership and management. The amending Bill, by its very amendments, creates n needless
unjustifiable d,scrimillntion which is definitdy f,gainst the 'spirit of the
Constitution, aiming at egalitarian society.
2. The general note has referred to another equally objectionable
change, which concerns the provision for reserving Bills relating to land
rights for thtl consideration of the President, and for his assent, before
such legislation can claim the protection of this amending legislation. No
such safegnad is included for the protection of Civil Liberties when
threatened by any State legislation.
'
3. The proposal to vslidate, by this Amending Bill, all existing law
relating to the points deaIt. with in this Bill, including the Sohedule, containing B8 many ttS 11 such pieces of legislation, is open to fundamental
objection. Not all these laws have been declared by competent judicial
authority to be offending against the Constitution, and so to be invalid.
None of these laws have been examined carefully by the Select Committee.
And yet they have been declared all summarily to be valid, and given the

16
Pl'CItt'otion en bloo of this amending legislation. This is a 9angerous precedent, which ought not to be allowed.
4. There is a much more serious objection to the llew additions in the
proposed new Articles, 31A and 3lB. The basic justification, on social as
well as economic gl'oum]s lIl!ly be found ill the desire to effect rudical
agrariall reforms; but the (>xi:-;tence of private rights in land stand as un.
inddensible obstruction to such u meaHure or peaceful social revolution.
vVhile sl'e],ing to abolit;h Lhe larger landowners, aud their iutennedilii·it·s
parfl8ites 0:1 land, and puttiug the Artielet; concerned out8ide the competence of the J udieiary ill discussing the claims for cornpensatioll of
dISP08S('SRed Jundowllt!1'S, 01' other such incubi on Iml'l, no provision is
mude to guard against the entil'e purpose of such legislation being defeated
by the se~ting up of such smuller but more tenacious landlord or peui;~.nt
proprietors. The latter not only are, taken individually too small to>
provide really economic cultivation and development of land; .they would
very likely be more ignorllollt, impecunious and unprogressive, and so unable
to effect indispensable and overdue improvements in the technique and
inl:'ltruments of land cultivation and 'development. The larger landlords,
being fewer in number, can be much more easily liquidated than the
smaller ones in an admittedly democratic set up.
Unless, therefore,
the dispossession of the larger landowners is accompanied by 8n effective
and simultaneOUs socialisat:on of "land, permitting its collective, or at
least co-operative. cultivation and development, there would be no real
benefit from this amendment. 'l'he originlll intention of Article 31 would,
conseql)ently, as well us of the new additions, will be defeated.
,1. The amendment proposed to Articles 85 and 87, vesting the power
to summon each House of Parliament, in place of the existing provision
saying "The Houses of Parl:ament shall be summoned &c. seems to me to
be not only unneC'essary; it is fraught with thf:l grentest potentiality for
mischief to a nascent del~ocraCy. It is, in my opinion, likely to pave the
way for a Presidential Dictatorship. which it was never the intention of
the Constitution to facilitate.
No satisfa.ctory explanation was forthcoming for suggesting this radical change £ronl the Articles as they stand
today.
The same objection appli~s to th~ corresponding amendment ill
the Articles relating to the Stutes' Legislatures.
.
6. The amendment proposed under Clause 13 (article 376) permitting
the appointment of nOll-citizens of India to high judicial office, in the
Union,-including even the office of the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Coul't.,-is objectionable, in my view, bot,h on groullds of national selfrespect ~s well as the limited number of persons for whose benefit this.
Amendment a.ppears to have been proposed.
Thel'e are, it is said. only
4 non-citizens of India who might benefit if this Amendment is accepted.
I see no reason why these p~r80ns should not acquire Indian citizenship.
if they desire to serve this country in such exalted positions.
Much
less can I persuade myself that we should amend our fundamental Constitution for auah individua.l benefit, 88 this Amendment seeks to do.
7. The Schedule attached to the amending Bill, valida.ting a number
of laws relating to land·tenure, passed by some States, is equally objeotionable.
Except one, in which the highest judicial authority has pronounced the Sta.te legislation in this beha.lf to be invalid, no other such
law hros been considered by the supreme judicial authority, and pronounced
upon adversly. Two of these laws have, I understand, been actually

..

16

#upheld. Under these oircumstanoes, I oannot help considering the proposed validation en bloc in the schedule to be as unnecessary as i~ is
.objectionable.
NEW DELHI;

'The 25th May, 1951.

K. T. SHAH.
VlI

I have signed the majority report subject to dissent. I have also
signed a joint dissentient minute dealing with some general objections
.against the Bill. The following are some additional notes dealing with
-<:ertain specific objections.

2. Clause IJ.-We have provided for the a.dvancement of some "Socially
-and educationally backward classes of citizens". I think this description
'should be enlarged to include "economically" backward classes also.
Cl,atU81J 3(1)(a).-Clause (2) of article 19 of ~he Constitution which

clause seeks to a.mend, now s~ands much improved by the new
provision that all restrictive laws against "freedom of speeoh and
.expression" guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) must be "reasonable".
This will enable our superior Courts to pronounce whether any law unduly
-.restricts the right and will ensure that the restrictions will be reasonable.
This is a great protection on this fundamental right. The reason for
refusing to incorporate the words "reasonable restriction" in the clause
-herein was due to an erroneous belief that the Supreme Court did not
.{lorreotly interpret the Constitution according to its time spirit.
It was
urged in the House that the Supreme Court should have found that our
Legislatures had some "police powers" outside the Constitution 8ecor·ding to the rules of interpretation of the U.S.A. Supreme Court. But
it we.s pointed out by our Supreme Coari thati Jibe 4merican doctrine was
·due to the existence of "due prooesa ()f law." in their Constitution which
we had at first adopted and then rejected and adopted the "procedure
€stablished by law" formula. It is respectfully sumbitted that the
-Supreme Court of India correctly interpreted the Constitution and the liberties of the subject and the freedom of Parliament are safe in their ha.nds.
~his

4. I think that article 19(2) as it is now proposed to be amended, has
many other serious faults. Legislation against mere incitements to off. ence goes too 'far. Under the Indian Penal Code, mere incitements to an
·offence is no offence unless the incitement is agreed to by any other
person in which case it amounts to an offence of conspiracy, or unless the
. offence abetted or any other offence is done in consequence of the incitement. in which case the incitement is punishable as an abetment. The
,Pena.l Code which has stood the test of over ninety years did not make
mere incit·ement an offence unless it is foJl(Jweil by agreement on a criminlll act. It was only in ~ome emergency Acts that this was made an offence. With the passing of the emergency, these Acts should be repealed.
5. Another serious fault is to empower legislation to punish defamatory
attacks on foreign States, and what is much more serious, is any thing
'which impairs friendly relations with foreign States. Dr. Ambedkar claim-

II

00 that he was thinking of only defamatoory; Attacb. .If 10, ~.)& auffioientiy
provjded for in the ola.use, as defama.tion of any foreign personality is 'COvered by the ciause. .All tuat we DtleU do ib to erua.rge ~e scope of tlltl lforeign
&l.a.tions Act, 19a2, if l:>a.rliament is so minded. The power sough~ goe.l>
too fa.r and may be used too easily to prohibit and punish ordinary and
fair criticism of foreign dairs. Again, any fair or outspoken erl ticism of
the Government my be made pUDishabk by .:-: -.nd the obso.cte iaw of
sedition under Section 124-A of the Penal Code will be revivt:d and perpetWLted. Again, communal difierences may too easily be made }Jona.i.
6. A serious cause of difficulties in the way of oi~ens and of disappointment of (:iovernment is that our penal and other laws were never adaptad
to suit the I:IthDdards laid down by the Constitution.
If the udaptlAot,ion
a.rticle of the Constitution was made" use of, as i~ should have been, we
would have got a cleurer picture of the real shape of much of our laws.
A: serious conseq uenoo 01 passing the cla use 8.8 recommended by jibe
Select Committee will be that many obsolete and dead laws will be
revived with retrospective effect, and, again, their real scope and effect.
could ilot be known With any c_ertrunty or exactitude. This will continue
to trouble our courts for ma.ny a time to come. The clause should further
be amended to remove the objeotions.

7.. Ulau8tJ 3(l)(b).-'rhis clause demands a.rticle 19(6). 'I'he real.
change is to be foun$! in the amended clause (6) (ii) which enables the
State to enter any busintlss or commercial field and practically oust any
competitor it'om business and virtually "acquires'~ his' propel'tYNith
nominal com,}Jbllsation or even with no compen"sa~on.

t>. OLau86 3(2).-1 have alrea.dy indica.ted the danger and uncertainty
of reviving and giving retrospective effect to dead laws while no one will
know for certain how much of the law is revived. This is a most
:b:v~n judgments and decrees
dangerous provisioll and must be omitted.
of courts will be entirely multifiad.
9. Clau861l 4 and 5.-These olauses attempt. to enaot a new' article 81·A
and affect the validity of the zamindliirJ abolition A,ots.
Although the
principl~ of these Actl:l is wi$!aly accepted, the orqoial test is adequate
or proper oompensation as WBB admitted by the Prime Minister in Farha·
ment. But all existing laws whether good or bad in that rel:!pect a.re
attempted to be revived irrespective of the question as j)o whether they
satisfy the cruoial test of oompensation. l'his is utterly'" expropria.tory
and ,shows high handedness and would serve £as a warning to owners of
other properties anli business of their approaching fate.
rrha result
will be widespl'ead panic and uncertainity rendering indus~ialisa.tion of
the oountry a difficult process.
10. Olau868 6, 7, 8 and ~.-The amendments suggested by these clauses
would enable the President and the Governors and Rajpramukhs to address
the legislatures only onoe in the year thus refusing to indicate policiea of
Governments on various outstanding matters. This will ourtail the
opportunities of a.ny furture "Opposition", if any, in our legislatures, fewer
This will consiopportunities of discussing and debating those polioies.
derably curtl:,,11 the right of the opposition to criticise ~ polio;r at. ~e
Gk>verDlDent.
"

,

II

11. 014'1.4'", 10 and ll.-No chango in the Conltitution ia nace.Bal')'.

12. Olause 12.-This clause seeks to amend article 8.72 of the Constitution which E:'mpowere4 the President to make adaptations to our laWI
within tWt) yellrb of the commello~ment of the Constitution.
'fhe
present clause seeks to enlarge th~ period to three year~.
~hese ~apt~­
t.iODS should allve been completed soon after the ptlStung of the ConstItution and JJlay in any case be completed. within the available period if
neoessary. These adaptations are urgent and should never be d'Ol.aycd.
'l'he Adllptation Orders under the (;tovernment of India Aot, 1985 completed baiore 1;hat Constitution came into force.
The present &mondment would encourage $lilatoriness on the part of the advisers of the
.President in a matter of the utmost urgency.
18. ClauBe la.-This relates to promotions of some Judges who are
not citizens.
'fhis could have been done by the "Removal of Difficulty"
article of the Constitution.
14. Artiole 14.-This article seeks to introduce a new Schedule to the
Constitution Which would revive all dead anll half dead enactmente
irrespective of their propriety or adequacy or their conformity to the
standard of compensation declared by the Prime Minister.
These Acta
have not been eX&mined with a view to finding out whether they are
properly irallleci. Parliament is asked to put rubber-stamp certifica~
o~ fitness to them without examining their contents.
Some glaring
examples of injustice anll arbitrariness have been brought to light, which
should be condemned outright as outrageous, are going to be sanctified
by the -.ti'lidation process~
'rhis can never be justified OD any grou>;lds
of principle or policy on any recognisable standard.
15. The entire Bill is hastily oonceived and is being rushed through
}larliament without any proper or satisfactory scrutiny by the publio or
Nothing has been placell before us to show
even by the Department.
that any but thE> most inadequate consideration haa been given to the
subject.
'l'here was DO urgency 8Jlrd this indecent haste cannot but be
condemned.
EveD this dissentient minute had to be prepared with
cOllsiderable haI1Ie.
NAZIRUDDIN AHMAD
NBW DBLm;

The 25th Mall, 1951 •.

VIII
I desire further to put on record that up to the time of writing thi8
minute (8-45 A.II. on i1he 25..th May, 1951) I have not, nor as far a8 I
could ascertain, no other member of the Select Committee has seen the
actual text of the Bill as finally settled by the Select Committee
after
several revi~ions.
This has acted us 1m additional. handicap in the way
of the draWIng up any accurate and lip to date dessentient note.
NEW DEIdlI;

TM 25th May, 1951.

NAZIRUDDIN AHMAD

BILL No. 48 of 1961.
THE CON8TI~Utl'ION (I'\IRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 1951
(As AMENDED BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE)

(Wor(Is underlined or 8idelined indicate the amendments suggested by tI••
Rfllect Committee; 4Isteriske inaicate omission•. )
A

BILL
to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament o.s follows:1. Short tttle.-This Act may be naIled the ConstitutJon (First .Am8lHllllent) Act, 1951.

2. Amendment of article 15.-To article 15 of
following elRuse shall be added:-

the

Constitution,

,be

I

.. (4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall
prevent t.he State from muking any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward clas5es of citizens
or for the Rcheduled Castes and the Rcheduled Tribes."

3. Amendment of article 19 and validation of certain lawS,-(l) In

10

:'t) £01' danse (2), th\!l,}oll~ingdA.llse shall be substituted, and
the >;aitl dall~e shall hp. clflf!i.n~rl <6,lwavfi'I to,havA hpPll l"n:wted in the
followillg form, namely: ~ '-". ' ,~',:, "
_ ',,'

. '.

al'ticle In of t1H~ Constitution,-

ord.JIl~u:je

.i5

.. (2) Nothing ill sub-clause (4)
(1) Sllnn affect the
o~J(~l'Ht,i()n of any existing law, 01' prevent the Rt;ate [l'Orn making l '
allY law, in 80 far ns "li(~h luw imposes rtlHs()nuble refltrict.ions on
the exel'ci~e of the right Bonferred by the snid f;l1b-eia11se in tbe'
intl'l'Asts of the I'ecurity of the State, friendl,Y relaiiol1s with
foreign States, public order, deCfmcy or morality, including, ill 20
particular, any existing or other law relating to ~ont..el11pt of coun,
detamation or incitement to an offence,";

(b) in clause (0), for the words beginning with t.he words "nothing
in the said sub-clause" and ending with the wmels "occupation, tra~
or ollo;;neRs", the following shull he substituted, lIfall\ely: .. nuthing in the said sub-clauRe shall atleGt\be Qperation of 8JX1
existing law in so far 111'1 it relatei!to,01"~~nt the St.ate from
making any la.w relating to,(i) the professional or te<.,oftDi('..a.\ >qnalifications neces88or'J ~
practising any prOfeRi:ion ().r C8'!'rying on Bny occupation, traCle- 0'
business, or
'
(il) the carrying.4;iJD by the State, or by a corporation OWII8d
or controned by th~ State, of any trade, business, indti&!9 or
service, whether·tG .flh~ A'Xclusion, p.omplete or partial, of ci~l""

or o4Ihel'Wi8e."

215

30

36

20

5

(g) No luw in iorue in the territory of India immediately before toe
commencement of the Constitution which is consistent with the provisions
of article 19 of the Constitution ns amended by sub-section (1) of this section
shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on the ground
only that, being a law which take~ Ilway or abridges the rip:ht. conferred
by Bub-clause (a) of clause (1) of the said article, its operation was not
lIand by sub-clause (2) of that Article as originRUy enacted • ... II< ••
l!J:z:plomati01t.-ln this sub-seotion, the expressioll "law in force" hall
the same m(lAning liS in clauf;e (1) of urtide 13 of t,he Constitution.

10

Ii

,. IDHrUoD of Dew 'article 81A.-After article 81 of the Constitutioll,
the following article shull be inserted, and ShRII be deemed always to have
been ins~rted, nAmely:"81~. Savillp of laws. pro.viding for a(;quisiti0n, ~f e8tat68! et(,.(1) Notwlthstandmg anythlDg In the foregomg prOVISions of thIS ·Part.

no law providing for the acquisition by the State of any estate or of
aUJ ri~hts therein or for the extinguishment or modification of any
such rights shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconaistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights confeJ'l'ed by,
any provisions of this Part:
Provided that where such 180,.,' is a law made by the Legislaturt'
of a State, the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless
auch law, having been reserved for the <'onsideTRtion of the President,
haa received his assent.
(~)

In this article,-

(a) the expression" estate" shall, in relation to any local area,
have the same meaning as that expression or its 10cs1 equivalent
bas in the existing law rplsting too hmdtennres in force in that
area;

30

<"} the expression "rights", ill relation to an estate, shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, uuderproprietor, tenure-holder or other intermediary aud any rights 01'
privileges in respect of land revenue."
6. InaertioD of Dew article SlB.-After article 8lA of the Constitution
... ;nserted by section 4, the following artide shl\)] be insert,ed, narneIJ:--

85

'SIB. Validation 01 certain Act8.-Without prejudice to the
gellerality of the provisiolls contuined in article 81A, none of the Acts
apecified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the provisions theroof shall
be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void,_ on the ground that
such Act 0:' provis!on is inconsistent with, or t-akes away or abridges
any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or tribuna) to
the contrary, each of the said Acts shall, subject to the power 1)£ any
competent Legislature. to repeal or amend it~olltinue in force."

, •• Amendment of arttele •. -For article 85 of the Constitution, the
tOllowing article shall be substituted, namely:. , "85, Se88ion. of Parliament, prorogation and diuoZution.-(l) The
President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament
to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit., but six months shall
not intervene between its last sitting in one session and
the date
appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
~2) The President may from time to time(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve t·he House of the People."
T. Amendment of article 87.-1n article 87 of the ConstitutioD,(1) in clause (1), for the words "every session" the words "the
first session after each general election to the House of the l>eople
and at the commencement of the first session of each year" shall be
substituted;

5

10

15

(2) in clause (.e), the words "and for the precedence of such disoussion over other business of the House" shall be omitted.

8. Amendment of &rUele 17'.-For article 174 of the Constitution, the
hUowing article shall be ~ubstituted, namely:"174. Se88ton8 of the State Legi8lature, prorogation and di880lution.-(l) The Governor shall from time to time summon the ,House or
each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and
place as he thinks fit, but SiX mOlllibs shal! not intervene between its
last sit,ting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in
thE' next session.
(2j 'l'Le

20

Governor may from time to tim,e-

(a) prorogue the House or either House;

(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly."

8, Amendment of article 176.-1n article 176 of the Constitut,ion,-(1) in clause (1), for the words "every session" the words "th~
first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly
and at the commencement of the first session of each year" shallb('
Bubstituted;
(2) in clause (2), the words "and for the precedence of such diAc~Js­
sion over other business of the House" shall be omitted.
10. Amendment of article 841,-In clause (1) oflrticle 341 of the
Oonstitution, for the words "may, after consultation with the Governor or
&jpramukh of a State," the words "may with respect to any State, I1nd
1fhere it is a State specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule, hftl'r
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh thereof," shall be substituted.

11. Amendment of article 3t2.-1n clauBe (1) of article 34~ cf the
Oonstitution, for the words "may, after consultation with the Govenlor or
Rajpr&mukh of a State," the words "may with respect to any State, I\ud
~ere it is a State specified in Part A or Part B of the Firlit Schedule, after
eoDsull;atioll with the Governor or Rajpramukh thereof," shall be substiMted.,

30

35

40

45

11. Amendment or dol. m.-In lub-clause (tI) of clause (8) of ,U'tiIIt

872 of the Constitution. for the words "two years It tche words "three ,eart"

shall be substituted.

5

18. Amendment Of antele 8"11.-At the end of clause (1) of article 871
of the Constitution. the following shall be added. namely:Any such Judge shall. notwithstanding that he is not a citil••
of India. be eligible for appoinbnent as Chief Justice of such Higk
Court, or as Chief Justice or other Judge of any other High Court or of
th,) Supreme Court."
II

10

1'. Addl\toD Of lflllth lohedwe.-After the Eighth Schedule to
Constitution, the following Schedule shall be added, namely:-

the·

"NINTH SCHEDULE

[Article 81B]
1. The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950).

15

2. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 (Bombay A.t
LXVII of 1948).
8. The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXI of
194~).

20

4. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act,
LXII of 1949).

1949

(Bombay Aet .

5. The Panch Mahals Mehwassi Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Aot
LXIII of 1(49).

6. The Bombay Khoti Abolition Act, 1950 (Bombay Act VI of 1(50).

25

7. The Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watan Abolition Act, 19M
(Bombay Act LX of 1950).
8. The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahala,
Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 (Madhya Pradesh Act I of 1951).
9. 'rhe Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act.
1948 (Madras Act XXVI of 1948).

30 10. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Ame"
ment Act, 1950 (Madras Act I r}f 1950).

11. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land BeIcnla Act, 1_
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951). ~

PARLlAMENT O~~ INDIA

Report of the Select Committee on the Bill to amend the Constitution of India..

(A8 amended by the Select Committee)

GtPD-LAD-· 270 P S-2t1·5 81-- 18,00

