REGISTERED NO. D. 221

The Gazette of India
EXTRAORDINARY
PART II—Section 2

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No.

25]

NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MAY 24, 1972/JYAISTHA 3, 1894

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed
as a separate compilation.

LOK SABHA
The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 24th May,
1972: —
BILL NO. 53 OF 1972

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —
1. (i) This Act may be called the Constitution
ment) Act, 1972.

(Thirtieth Amend- Short

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

title
and com.
mencement.

2. In article 133 of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following Amendment of
clause shall be substituted, namely: —
article

"(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, 133.
decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the
territory of India if the High Court certifies—
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of
general importance; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question
needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.".
3. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect—
(a) any appeal under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or subclause (c) of clause (1) of article 133 of the Constitution which
immediately before the commencement of this Act was pending
before the Supreme Court; or
(431)

Special
provision
as to

pending
proceedings etc.

432

THb GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART ti—

(b) any appeal preferred on or after the commencement of this
Act against any judgment, decree or final Order in a civil proceeding
of a High Court by virtue of a certificate given by the High Court
before the commencement of this Act under sub-clause (a) or subclause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 133;
find every such appeal may be heard and disputed of or, as the case may
be, entertained, heard and disposed of by the Supreme Court as if this
Act had not been passed.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), no appeal shall lie
to the Supreme Court under clause (1) of article 133 of the Constitution
from any judgment, decree OT final order arising out of a suit or other
civil proceeding which was instituted or commenced in any cuurt before
the commencement of this Act unless such appeal satisfies the provisions
of that clause as amended by this Act.

SEC. 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

433

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
This Bill seeks to give effect to the recommendations of the Law
Commission of India in its Forty-fourth and Forty-fifth Reports on Civil
Appeals to the Supreme Court on certificate of fitness. At present an
appeal lies to the Supreme Court, inter alia, on a certificate given by a
High Court that the amount or the value of the subject-matter of dispute
is not less than twenty thousand rupees or that the judgment, decree
or final order involves, directly or indirectly, some claim or question
respecting property of the like amount. The valuation cannot be the
rational yardstick for a right to appeal. An important question of law
can arise even in suits of small value and the test of valuation results
in cases without merit going up to the Supreme Court. The Law Commission recommended that clauses (a) and (b) of article 133(1) of the
Constitution should be omitted and that an appeal should lie to the
Supreme Court only if the High Court certifies that the case involves
a substantial question of law of general importance and that in the
opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the
Supreme Court. The amendment of the article accordingly would curtail the number of appeals which are filed in the Supreme Court merely
on the valuation test being satisfied, without any merit in them. The
Bill seeks to achieve this object.

NEW DELHI;

H. R. GOKHALE.

The 8th May, 1972.

S. L. SHAKDHER,
Secretary.

PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDtA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. 1 9 7 2

