REGISTERED No. D. [?] The Gazette of India EXTRAORDINARY PART II—Section 1 PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 31] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1963/ASVINA 15, 1885 MINISTRY OF LAW (Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 7th October, 1963/Asvina 15, 1885 (Saka) The following Acts of Parliament received
the assent of the President on the 5th October, 1963, and are hereby published for general
information:— THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT) ACT, 1963 [5th October, 1963] An Act further to
amend the Constitution of India. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:— 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. 2.
In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— "(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by such authority and in
such manner as Parliament may by law provide." 3. In article 128 of the Constitution, after the
words "Federal Court", the words "or who has held the office of a Judge of a High Court and is duly
qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court" shall be inserted. 4. In article 217 of
the Constitution.— (a) in clause (1), for the words "sixty years", the words "sixty-two years" shall
be substituted; THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II (b) after clause (2), the following
clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:— "(3) If any
question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the question shall be decided by the
President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President shall
be final.” 5. In article 222 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:— "(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the period he
serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, as a Judge of
the other High Court, be entitled to receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance
as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, such compensatory allowance as
the President may by order fix.” 6. In article 224 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words
"sixty years", the words "sixty-two years" shall be substituted. 7. After article 224 of the
Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— "224A. Notwithstanding anything in
this Chapter, the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State may at any time, with the previous
consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of
any other High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such
person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the
President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall
not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: Provided that nothing in this article
shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court
unless he consents so to do.”. 8. In article 226 of the Constitution,— (a) after clause (1), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— "(1A) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue
directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High
Court exercising SEC 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY jurisdiction in relation to the
territories within which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such
power, notwithstanding that the seat of such Govern- ment or authority or the residence of such
person is not within those territories."; (b) in clause (2), for the word, brackets and figure
"clause (1)", the words, brackets, figures and letter "clause (1) or clause (1A)" shall be
substituted. 9. In article 297 of the Constitution, after the words "territorial waters", the words
"or the continental shelf" shall be inserted. 10. In article 311 of the Constitution, for clauses
(2) and (3), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely :— "(2) No such person as aforesaid
shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of
those charges and where it is proposed, after such inquiry, to impose on him any such penalty, until
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed, but
only on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry: Provided that this clause shall not
apply— (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which
has led to his con- viction on a criminal charge; or (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or
re- move a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that
authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or (c) where the
President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of
the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry. (3) If, in respect of any such person as
aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is
referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the autho- rity empowered to dismiss or remove
such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final." 11. In article 316 of the Constitution, after
clause (1), the follow- ing clause shall be inserted, namely :— "(1A) If the office of the Chairman
of the Commission be- comes vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or THE GAZETTE OF
INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, those
duties shall, until some person appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the
duties thereof or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed by
such one of the other members of the Commission as the President, in the case of the Union
Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in the case of a State Commission,
may appoint for the purpose.". 12. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I, in entry
78, after the word "organisation", the brackets and words "(including vacancies)" shall be inserted
and shall be deemed always to have been inserted. THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT) ACT, 1963
[5th October, 1963] An Act further to amend the Constitution of India. Be it enacted by Parliament
in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 1. This Act may be called the
Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963. 2. In article 19 of the Constitution,— (a) in clause
(2), after the words "in the interests of", the words "the sovereignty and integrity of India,"
shall be inserted; (b) in clauses (3) and (4), after the words "in the interests of", the words "the
sovereignty and integrity of India or" shall be inserted. 3. In article 84 of the Constitution, for
clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— "(a) is a citizen of India, and
makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath
or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule;". 4. In article
173 of the Constitution, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— "(a) is
a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that behalf by the
Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;".
