LOK SABHA

CORRIGENDA

to

THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978

(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha)

1. Page 19, line 6,- for "supp. SCR 11)" read "Supp. SCR 1)"

2. Page 21, lines 8 and 9,- for "sub-clause (2)" read "clause (2)"

3. Page 23, line 18 from bottom,- for "provision" read "provisions"

4. Page 25, line 8,- for "a Central Government" read "the Central Governm [?]"

5. Page 28, line 5,- for "article 3" read "article 13"

6. Page 28, line 7 from bottom,- for "qustion" read "question"

7. Page 32, line 8,- for "cased" read "ceased"

8. Page 34, in the marginal heading to artico 239 B,- for "Ordidinances" read "Ordinances"

9. Page 35, line 5 from bottom,- for "order" read "orders"

10. Page 38, line 23,- for "hereby" read "whereby"

11. Page 39, line 14 from bottom,- for "p?aces" read "place"

P. T.

12. Page 40, in the marginal heading to article 359,- for "tne enforcement" read "the enforcement"

13. Page 43, line 2,- for "1978" read "1976"

NEW DELHI; May 10, 1978 Vaisakha 20, 1900 (Saka)

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON [?]

THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 --- ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES ---

CLAUSES 1. Short title and commencement. 2. Amendment of article 19. 3. Amendment of article 22. 4.
Amendment of article 30. 5. Omission of sub-heading after article 30. 6. Omission of article 31. 7.
Amendment of article 31A. 8. Amendment of article 31C. 9. Amendment of article 38. 10. Substitution
of new article for article 71. 11. Amendment of article 74. 12. Amendment of article 77. 13.
Amendment of article 83. 14. Substitution of new article for article 103. 15. Amendment of article
105. 16. Amendment of article 123. 17. Amendment of article 132. 18. Amendment of article 133. 19.
Amendment of article 134. 20. Insertion of new article 134A. 21. Amendment of article 139A. 22.
Amendment of article 150. 23. Amendment of article 166. 24. Amendment of article 172. 25.
Substitution of new article for article 192. 26. Amendment of article 194. 27. Amendment of article
213. 28. Amendment of article 217. 29. Amendment of article 225. 30. Amendment of article 226

CLAUSES 31. Amendment of article 227. 32. Amendment of article 239B. 33. Omission of article 257A.
34. Insertion of new Chapter IV in Part XII. 35. Omission of Part XIVA. 36. Amendment of article
329. 37. Omission of article 329A. 38. Amendment of article 352. 39. Amendment of article 356. 40.
Amendment of article 358. 41. Amendment of article 359. 42. Amendment of article 360. 43. Insertion
of new article 361A. 44. Amendment of article 366. 45. Amendment of article 368. 46. Amendment of
article 371F. 47. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule. 48. Amendment of the Ninth Schedule. 49.
Amendment of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976.

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON [?]

Bill No. 88 of 1978

THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amend- ment) Act, 1978.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act.

2. In article 19 of the Constitution,—

(a) in clause (1),—

(i) in sub-clause (e), the word "and" shall be inserted at the end;

(ii) sub-clause (f) shall be omitted;

(b) in clause (5), for the words, brackets and letters "sub-clauses (d), (e) and (f)", the words,
brackets and letters "sub-clauses (d) and (e)" shall be substituted.

3. In article 22 of the Constitution,—

(a) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

'(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a
longer period than two

months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the recommendations of the Chief
Justice of the appropriate High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of two
months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:

Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members,
and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other members shall
be serving or retired Judges of any High Court:

Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the
maximum period pre- scribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (a) of clause (7).

Explanation.—In this clause, "appropriate High Court " means,— (i) in the case of the detention of
a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by the Government of India or an officer or
authority subordinate to that Government, the High Court for the Union territory of Delhi;

(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by the
Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for that State; and

(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by the
administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to such administrator,
such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by Parliament in this behalf.';";

(b) in clause (7),— (i) sub-clause (a) shall be omitted; (ii) sub-clause (b) shall be re-lettered
as sub-clause (a); and (iii) sub-clause (c) shall be re-lettered as sub-clause (b) and in the
sub-clause as so re-lettered, for the words, brackets, letter and figure "sub-clause (a) of clause
(4)", the word, brackets and figure "clause (4)" shall be substituted.

4. In article 30 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: — "(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisi- tion of any property of an
educational institution established and administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1), the
State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the acquisition of
such property is such as would not restrict or arrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.".

5. The sub-heading "Right to Property" occurring after article 30 of the Constitution shall be
omitted.

6. Article 31 of the Constitution shall be omitted.

7. In article 31A of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words and figures "article 14,
article 19 or article 31", the words and figures "article 14 or article 19" shall be substituted.

8. In article 31C of the Constitution,—

(a) for the words and figures "all or any of the principles laid down in Part IV", the words,
brackets, letters and figures "the principles laid down in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39"
shall be substituted;

(b) for the words and figures "article 14, article 19 or article 31;", the words and figures
"article 14 or article 19:" shall be substituted;

(c) the words "and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy
shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to such
policy:" shall be omitted.

9. Article 38 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof and after the clause as
so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in income, and endeavour to
eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but
also amongst groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations."."

10. For article 71 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

"71. (1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President
or Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be
final.

(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme
Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of
President or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the
Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter
relating to or connected with the election of a President or Vice-President.

(4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be called in question on the
ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral
college electing him."."

11. In article 74 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be inserted at
the end, namely:—

“Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either
generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration.”.

12. In article 77 of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted.

13. (1) In article 83 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words “six years” in both the
places where they occur, the words “five years” shall be substituted.

(2) The amendments made by sub-section (1) to clause (2) of article 83 shall apply also to the
House of the People in existence on the date of coming into force of this section without prejudice
to the power of Parliament with respect to the extension of the duration of that House under the
proviso to that clause.

14. For article 103 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

“103. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament has become
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the question shall
be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the
Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.”.

15. In article 105 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words “shall be those of the House
of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the
commencement of this Constitution”, the words, figures and brackets “shall be those of that House
and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the
Constitution (Forty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1978” shall be substituted.

16. In article 123 of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted.

17. In article 132 of the Constitution,— (a) in clause (1), for the words “if the High Court
certifies”, the words, figures and letter “if the High Court certifies under article 134A” shall be
substituted; (b) clause (2) shall be omitted; (c) in clause (3), the words “or such leave is
granted,” and the words “and, with the leave of the Supreme Court, on any other ground” shall be
omitted.

18. In article 133 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "if the High Court
certifies—", the words, figures and letter "if the High Court certifies under article 134A—" shall
be substituted.

19. In article 134 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (c) of clause (1), for the word "certifies",
the words, figures and letter "certifies under article 134A" shall be substituted.

20. After article 134 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"134A. Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred
to in clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article 134,—

(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and

(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately
after the passing or making of such judgment, decree, final order or sentence,

determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question whether a certificate of
the nature referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case
may be, sub- clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case."

21. In article 139A of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—

"(1) Where cases involving the same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before
the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and the Supreme
Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application made by the Attorney-General of India or
by a party to any such case that such questions are substantial questions of general import- ance,
the Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts
and dispose of all the cases itself."

22. In article 150 of the Constitution, for the words "after consultation with", the words "with
the concurrence of" shall be substituted.

23. In article 166 of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted.

24. (1) In article 172 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "six years" in both the
places where they occur, the words "five years" shall be substituted.

(2) The amendments made by sub-section (1) to clause (1) of article 172—

(a) shall not apply to any existing State Legislative Assembly the period of existence whereof as
computed from the date appointed for its first meeting to the date of coming into force of this
section

(both dates inclusive) is more than four years and eight months but every such Assembly shall,
unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved on the expiry of— (i) a period of four months from the
date of coming into force of this section; or (ii) a period of six years from the date appointed
for its first meeting, whichever period expires earlier; (b) shall apply to every other existing
State Legislative Assem- bly without prejudice to the power of Parliament with respect to the
extension of duration of such Assembly under the proviso to the said clause (1). Explanation I.—In
its application to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim referred to in clause (b) of
article 371F of the Constitution, this sub-section shall have effect as if— (i) the date appointed
for the first meeting of that Assem- bly were the 26th day of April, 1975; and (ii) the references
in clause (a) of this sub-section to "four years and eight months" and "six years" were references
to "three years and eight months" and "five years" respectively. Explanation II.—In this
sub-section, "existing State Legislative Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly of a State in
existence on the date of coming into force of this section. 25. For article 192 of the
Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:— "192. (1) If any question arises
as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a State has become subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 191, the question shall be referred for the
decision of the Governor and his decision shall be final. (2) Before giving any decision on any
such question, the Gov- ernor shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act
according to such opinion". 26. In article 194 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words
"shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members
and committees, at the commencement of this Constitution", the words, figures and brackets "shall
be those of that House and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force
of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amend- ment) Act, 1978" shall be substituted. 27. In
article 213 of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted.

28. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (2),—

(a) in sub-clause (b), the word “or” occurring at the end shall be omitted;

(b) sub-clause (c) shall be omitted;

(c) in the Explanation, clause (a) shall be re-lettered as clause (aa) and before clause (aa) as so
re-lettered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of
India, there shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial office, during which the
person has been an advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any
post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law;”.

29. In article 225 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—

“Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the High
Courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in
the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall
no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.”.

30. In article 226 of the Constitution,—

(a) in clause (1), for the portion beginning with the words “writs in the nature of habeas corpus,
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them” and ending with the words “such
illegality has resulted in substantial failure of justice.”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—

“writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari or any of
them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.”;

(b) for clauses (3), (4), (5) and (6), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of injunction or stay or in any
other manner, is made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a petition under clause (1), without—

(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents in support of the plea for
such interim order; and

(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard,

makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and furnishes a copy of such
application to the party in whose favour such order has been made or the counsel of

such party, the High Court shall dispose of the application within a period of two weeks from the
date on which it is received or from the date on which the copy of such application is so
furnished, whichever is later, or where the High Court is closed on the last day of that period,
before the expiry of the next day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that period, or, as
the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.";

(c) clause (7) shall be renumbered as clause (4).

31. In article 227 of the Constitution,—

(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.”;

(b) clause (5) shall be omitted.

32. In article 239B of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted.

33. Article 257A of the Constitution shall be omitted.

34. In Part XII of the Constitution, after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—

“CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY

300A. No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.”.

35. Part XIVA of the Constitution shall be omitted.

36. In article 329 of the Constitution, in the opening portion, the words, figures and letter “but
subject to the provisions of article 329A” shall be omitted.

37. Article 329A of the Constitution shall be omitted.

38. In article 352 of the Constitution,—

(a) in clause (1),—

(i) for the words “internal disturbance”, the words “armed rebellion” shall be substituted;

(ii) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

"Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression or by armed rebellion may be made
before the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is
satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.";

(b) for clauses (2), (2A) and (3), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—

"(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.

(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such
Proclamation unless the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consisting of
the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75) that such a
Proclamation may be issued has been communicated to him in writing.

(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and
shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the
expiration of one month unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by
resolutions of both Houses of Parliament:

Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation)
is issued at a time when the House of the People has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the
House of the People takes place during the period of one month referred to in this clause, and if a
resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution
with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration
of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the
date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also
passed by the House of the People.

(5) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a
period of six months from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the
Proclamation under clause (4):

Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a
Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament the Proclamation shall, unless revoked,
continue in force for a further period of six months from the date on which it would otherwise have
ceased to operate under this clause:

Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such
period of six months and a

resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclama- tion has been passed by the Council
of States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate
at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after
its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days, a resolution
approving the con- tinuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the
People. (6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed by either House of
Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less
than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting. (7) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the foregoing clauses, the President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause
(1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation if the House of the People passes a resolution
disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, such Proclamation.
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than one- tenth of the total number of members of
the House of the People has been given, of their intention to move a resolution for disapproving,
or, as the case may be, for disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation issued under
clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation,— (a) to the Speaker, if the House is in
session; or (b) to the President, if the House is not in session, a special sitting of the House
shall be held within fourteen days from the date on which such notice is received by the Speaker.
or, as the case may be, by the President, for the purpose of considering such resolution.";" (c)
clause (4) shall be renumbered as clause (9) and in the clause as so renumbered, for the words
"internal disturbance" in both the places where they occur, the words "armed rebellion" shall be
substituted; (d) clause (5) shall be omitted. 39. In article 356 of the Constitution,— (a) in
clause (4),— (i) for the words, brackets and figure "one year from the date of the passing of the
second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause (3)", the words "six months from
the date of issue of the Proclamation" shall be substituted; (ii) in the first proviso, for the
words "one year", the words "six months" shall be substituted; (iii) in the second proviso, for the
words "one year", the words "six months" shall be substituted;

(b) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution with respect to the continuance
in force of a Proclamation approved under clause (3) for any period beyond the expiry of one year
from the date of issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either House of Parliament
unless—

(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in
the whole or any part of the State, at the time of the passing of such resolution, and

(b) the Election Commission certifies that the conti- nuance in force of the Proclamation approved
under clause (3) during the period specified in such resolution is neces- sary on account of
difficulties in holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned."

40. Article 358 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) of that article, and—

(a) in clause (1) as so renumbered,—

(i) in the opening portion, for the words "While a Procla- mation of Emergency is in operation",
the words "While a Procla- mation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of
the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression is in operation" shall be
substituted;

(ii) in the proviso, for the words "where a Proclamation of Emergency", the words "where such
Proclamation of Emergency" shall be substituted:

(b) after clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply—

(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or

(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital."

41. In article 359 of the Constitution,—

(a) in clauses (1) and (1A), for the words and figures "the rights conferred by Part III", the
words, figures and brackets "the rights conferred by Part III (except article 21)" shall be
substituted;

(b) after clause (1A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply—

(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or

(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.”.

42. In article 360 of the Constitution,— (a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:— “(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)— (a) may be revoked or varied by
a subsequent Proclamation; (b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament; (c) shall cease to
operate at the expiration of two months, unless before the expiration of that period it has been
approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament:

Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the House of the People has been
dissolved or the dissolu- tion of the House of the People takes place during the period of two
months referred to in sub-clause (c), and if a resolution ap- proving the Proclamation has been
passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall
cease to operate at the expi- ration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People
first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expi- ration of the said period of thirty
days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.”; (b)
clause (5) shall be omitted.

43. After article 361 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— ‘361A.
(1) No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of the
publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of
Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of
a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the publica- tion of any report of the
proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as
the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of a State.

(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by means of wireless
telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by means of a broadcasting station as it
applies in relation to reports or matters published in a newspaper.

Explanation.—In this article, “newspaper” includes a news agency report containing material for
publication in a newspaper.’

44. Article 366 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (2) of that article, and before
clause (2) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— ‘(1) In the Preamble
to this Constitution,— (1) the expression “REPUBLIC”, as qualified by the expression “SECULAR”,
means a republic in which there is equal respect for all religions; and (2) the expression
“REPUBLIC”, as qualified by the expression “SOCIALIST”, means a republic in which there is freedom
from all forms of exploitation, social, political and economic.’

45. In article 368 of the Constitution,— (a) in clause (2), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— “Provided further that if such amendment— (a) seeks to make any
change which, if made, would have the effect of— (i) impairing the secular or democratic character
of this Constitution; or (ii) abridging or taking away the rights of citizens under Part III; or
(iii) prejudicing or impeding free and fair elections to the House of the People or the Legislative
Assemblies of States on the basis of adult suffrage; or (iv) compromising the independence of the
judiciary; or (b) seeks to amend this proviso, the amendment shall also require to be approved by
the people of India at a referendum under clause (4).’; (b) for clauses (4) and (5), the following
clauses shall be substituted, namely:— “(4) The referendum for the purpose of seeking the approval
of the people of India for any amendment of the nature referred to in the second proviso to clause
(2) shall be through a poll, and— (i) all persons who are for the time being eligible to be voters
under article 326 at elections to the House of the People shall be entitled to vote at such poll;
and (ii) any such amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the people of India if such
amendment is approved by a majority of the voters voting at such poll and the voters voting at such
poll constitute not less than fifty-one per cent. of the voters entitled to vote at such poll. (5)
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the rolls of voters for, and the
conduct of, every referendum under this article shall vest in the Election Commission and the
result of such referendum as declared by the Election Commission shall not be called in question in
any court.

(6) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4) and (5), Parliament may from time to time by law make
provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, referenda under this
article, including the preparation of the rolls of voters.”

46. In article 371F of the Constitution, in clause (c), for the words “six years”, the words “five
years” shall be substituted, and for the words “five years” in both the places where they occur,
the words “four years” shall be substituted.

47. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—

(a) in List I—Union List, entry 2A shall be omitted;

(b) in List II—State List,—

(i) in entry 1, for the words “the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed force
of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or unit
thereof”, the words “the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the
Union” shall be substituted;

(ii) for entry 2, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“2. Police, including railway and village police.”;

(iii) after entry 10, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

“11. Education, including universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of
List I and entry 25 of List III”.;

(iv) after entry 18, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

“19. Forests.”.;

(v) in entry 41, for the words “State public services”, the words, figures and letter “State public
services subject to the provisions of entry 11B of List III” shall be substituted;

(c) in List III—Concurrent List,—

(i) after entry 11A, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

“11B. Adjudication or trial by tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and
conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the
affairs of a State or of a local or other authority subject to the control of a State Government.”;

(ii) entry 17A shall be omitted;

(iii) for entry 25, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

“25. Vocational and technical training of labour.”.

48. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, entries 87, 92 and 130 shall be omitted.

49. In the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, sections 18, 19, 21, 22, 31, 32, 34,
35, 58 and 59 shall be omitted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Recent experience has shown that the fundamental rights, including those of life and liberty,
granted to citizens by the Constitution are capable of being taken away by a transient majority. It
is, therefore, necessary to provide adequate safeguards against the recurrence of such a
contingency in the future and to ensure to the people themselves an effective voice in determining
the form of government under which they are to live. This is one of the primary objects of this
Bill.

2. It is, therefore, proposed to provide that certain changes in the Constitution which would have
the effect of impairing its secular or democratic character, abridging or taking away fundamental
rights, prejudicing or impeding free and fair elections on the basis of adult suffrage and
compromising the independence of judiciary, can be made only if they are approved by the people of
India by a majority of votes at a referendum in which at least fifty-one per cent. of the
electorate participate. Article 368 is being amended to ensure this.

3. In view of the special position sought to be given to fundamental rights, the right to property,
which has been the occasion for more than one amendment of the Constitution, would cease to be a
fundamental right and become only a legal right. Necessary amendments for this purpose are being
made to article 19 and article 31 is being deleted. It would, however, be ensured that the removal
of property from the list of fundamental rights would not affect the right of minorities to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

4. Similarly, the right of persons holding land for personal cultivation and within the ceiling
limit to receive compensation at the market value would not be affected.

5. Property, while ceasing to be a fundamental right, would, however, be given express recognition
as a legal right, provision being made that no person shall be deprived of his property save in
accordance with law.

6. A Proclamation of Emergency under article 352 has virtually the effect of amending the
Constitution by converting it for the duration into that of a Unitary State and enabling the rights
of the citizen to move the courts for the enforcement of fundamental rights—including the right to
life and liberty—to be suspended. Adequate safeguards are, therefore, necessary to ensure that this
power is properly exercised and is not abused. It is, therefore, proposed that a Proclamation of
Emergency can be issued only when the security of India or any part of its territory is threatened
by war or external aggression or by armed rebellion. Internal disturbance not amounting to armed
rebellion would not be a ground for the issue of a Proclamation.

7. Further, in order to ensure that a Proclamation is issued only after due consideration, it is
sought to be provided that an Emergency can be proclaimed only on the basis of written advice
tendered to the President by the Cabinet. In addition, as a Proclamation of Emergency virtually has
the effect of amending the Constitution, it is being provided that the Proclamation would have to
be approved by the two Houses of Parliament by the same majority which is necessary to amend the
Constitution and such approval would have to be given within a period of one month. Any such
Proclamation would be in force only for a period of six months

and can be continued only by further resolutions passed by the same majority. The Proclamation
would also cease to be in operation if a reso- lution disapproving the continuance of the
Proclamation is passed by Lok Sabha. Ten per cent. or more of the Members of Lok Sabha can requi-
sition a special meeting for considering a resolution for disapproving the Proclamation.

8. As a further check against the misuse of the Emergency provisions and to put the right to life
and liberty on a secure footing, it would be provided that the power to suspend the right to move
the court for the enforcement of a fundamental right cannot be exercised in respect of the
fundamental right to life and liberty. The right to liberty is further strengthened by the
provision that a law for preventive detention cannot authorise, in any case, detention for a longer
period than two months, un- less an Advisory Board has reported that there is sufficient cause for
such detention. An additional safeguard would be provided by the require- ment that the Chairman of
an Advisory Board shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and that the Board shall
be constituted in accordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of that High Court.

9. A special provision is being made guaranteeing the right of the media to report freely and
without censorship the proceedings in Par- liament and the State Legislatures. The provision with
regard to the breakdown of the constitutional machinery in the States is being amended so as to
provide that a Proclamation issued under article 356 would be in force only for a period of six
months in the first instance and that it cannot exceed one year ordinarily. However, if a
Proclamation of Emer- gency is in operation and the Election Commission certifies that the ex-
tension of the President's rule beyond a period of one year is necessary on account of difficulties
in holding elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned, the period of operation of
the Proclamation can be extended beyond one year. This is subject to the existing limit of three
years. These changes would ensure that democratic rule is restored to a State after the minimum
period which will be necessary for holding elections.

10. With a view to avoiding delays, it is proposed to amend articles 132, 133 and 134 and insert a
new article 134A to provide that a High Court should consider the question of granting a
certificate for appeal to Supreme Court immediately after the delivery of the judgment, decree,
final order or sentence concerned on the basis of an oral appli- cation by a party or, if the High
Court deems fit so to do, on its own motion. Cases of special leave to appeal by Supreme Court will
be left to be regulated exclusively by article 136.

11. The other amendments proposed in the Bill are mainly for re- moving or correcting the
distortions which came into the Constitution by reason of amendments enacted during the period of
the Internal Emergency.

12. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions of the Bill.

NEW DELHI; The 9th May, 1978. SHANTI BHUSHAN.

Notes on clauses

1. Clauses 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, sub-clause (b) of clause 8 and clause 34.—The object of the amendments
proposed in these provisions is to take away the right to property from the category of fundamental
rights and make the same a right which can be regulated by ordinary law. Clause 2(a)(ii) seeks to
omit sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of article 19 which guarantees to citizens the right to acquire,
hold and dispose of property. Clause 6 seeks to omit article 31 relating to the right to property.
The safeguard contained in article 31 relating to acquisition of property of an educational
institution established and administered by a minority is sought to be incorporated in article 30
by the amendment to that article proposed in clause 4. Clause 34 seeks to insert a new article 300A
in Part XII of the Constitution to provide that no person shall be deprived of his property save by
authority of law. The amendments proposed in clause 2(a)(i), clause 2(b), clause 5, clause 7 and
clause 8(b) are of a consequential nature.

2. Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend the provisions as to preventive detention contained in
article 22—

(a) for restricting the maximum period for which a person may be detained without obtaining the
opinion of the Advisory Board from three months to two months;

(b) for providing that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other
members, that the composition of an Advisory Board shall be in accordance with the recommendations
of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court (that is to say, the High Court for Delhi in the
case of detention orders made by the Central Government or officers subordinate to the Central
Government; the High Court for a State in the case of detention orders made by a State Government
or officers subordinate to a State Government; and such High Court as may be specified by
Parliament by law in the case of orders of detention made by the Administrator of a Union territory
or officers subordinate to him), and that the Chairman of an Advisory Board shall be a sitting
Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other members of an Advisory Board shall be sitting or
retired Judges of any High Court; and

(c) for abolishing the system of preventive detention without reference to an Advisory Board
provided in sub-clause (a) of clause (7) of article 22.

3. Clauses 4, 5, 6 and 7.—See paragraph 1 above.

4. Clause 8.—The amendment proposed in sub-clause (a) of this clause, is for confining the
protection afforded by article 31C only to laws giving effect to the policy of the State towards
securing the directive principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39. This would have
the effect of restoring the article to the form in which it stood before the amendment made to the
article by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)

Act, 1976 came into force. The amendment proposed in sub-clause (b) is consequential to the
omission of article 31 (see paragraph 1 above). The amendment proposed in sub-clause (c) is for
omitting the portion relating to declaration contained in article 31C which was struck down by the
Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala (1973 supp. SCR 11).

5. Clause 9.—This clause seeks to insert a new directive principle in article 38 to the effect that
the State shall strive to minimise inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate inequalities
in status, facilities and opportunities not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of
people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.

6. Clause 10.—Article 71 as originally enacted gave jurisdiction to the Supreme Court to inquire
into all doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or
Vice-President. The Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, substituted the article by a
new article leaving it to Parliament to determine the authority or body which may inquire into such
doubts and disputes. This clause seeks to restore the position as it obtained before the
Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, came into force.

7. Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend clause (1) of article 74 of the Constitution to provide
that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider any advice tendered by them
and that the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.

8. Clauses 12 and 23.—The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act included a new clause (4) in
article 77 and a new clause (4) in article 166 to take away the power of courts to compel
production of rules relating to transaction of the business of the Government of India and the
Government of a State. Clause 12 seeks to omit the said clause (4) of article 77 while clause 23
seeks to omit the said clause (4) of article 166.

9. Clauses 13, 24 and 46.—These clauses seek to amend articles 83, 172 and 371F respectively of the
Constitution to restore the term of the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies to five
years with necessary saving provisions.

10. Clauses 14 and 25.—These clauses seek to substitute articles 103 and 192 (relating respectively
to decisions on questions as to disqualification of Members of Parliament and State Legislatures)
to provide that decisions on questions as to disqualification of Members shall be in accordance
with the opinion of the Election Commission and thereby restore the position as it obtained prior
to the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act.

11. Clauses 15 and 26.—These clauses seek to amend article 105 and article 194 (relating
respectively to the privileges of Houses of Parliament and of State Legislatures). The amendments
are for the purpose of omitting the references to the House of Commons in these articles.

12. Clauses 16, 27 and 32.—The Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, inserted a new
clause (4) in article 123, article 213 and article 239B (relating respectively to the powers of the

President, Governor of a State and Administrator of a Union territory to promulgate Ordinances) to
specify expressly that the satisfaction of the President, Governor or Administrator regarding the
existence of the circumstances necessary for taking immediate action by promulgation of an
Ordinance shall be final and conclusive. The said new clauses are proposed to be omitted.

13. Clauses 17, 18, 19 and 20.—At present appeal lies under article 132 of the Constitution to the
Supreme Court in certain cases upon the High Court granting a certificate under that article. Where
the High Court has refused to give such a certificate, the Supreme Court may grant special leave.
Under article 133, appeal lies to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a
civil proceeding of a High Court if the High Court grants a certificate under that article. Under
article 134(1)(c), an appeal lies to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence
in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High Court grants a certificate that the case is a
fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court. It is proposed to amend articles 132, 133 and 134 and
insert a new article 134A to provide that the High Court should consider the question of granting
of certificate immediately on the delivery of the judgment, decree, final order, or sentence
concerned on the basis of an oral application by a party or, if the High Court deems it fit so to
do, on its own motion. It is also proposed to omit the provisions in article 132 relating to grant
of special leave by Supreme Court in cases where the High Court refuses to give a certificate.
Cases of special leave to appeal by Supreme Court will thus be left to be regulated exclusively by
article 136 of the Constitution.

14. Clause 21.—This relates to article 139A which was inserted by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act. Under clause (1) of this article, if the Supreme Court is satisfied, on an
application made by the Attorney-General of India, that cases involving the same or substan- tially
the same questions of law are pending before it and one or more High Courts or before two or more
High Courts and that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme
Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the High Courts and dispose
of all the cases itself. The Supreme Court can take action under this provision only if an
application is made by the Attorney-General. Clause (1) of article 139A is sought to be amended so
as to enable a party to any such case also to make a similar application to the Supreme Court.

15. Clause 22.—Under article 150, as amended by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, the
form in which accounts of the Union and the States shall be kept shall be such as may be prescribed
by the President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. This clause
seeks to amend article 150 to provide that the form should be prescribed with the concurrence of
the Comptroller and Audi- tor-General and not merely after consultation.

16. Clause 23.—See paragraph 8 above. 17. Clause 24.—See paragraph 9 above. 18. Clause 25.—See
paragraph 10 above. 19. Clause 26.—See paragraph 11 above.

20. Clause 27.—See paragraph 12 above.

21. Clause 28.—Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to omit sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of article
217 of the Constitution which was inserted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act for
making persons who, in the opinion of the President, are distinguished jurists, eligible for
appointment as Judges of High Courts. The amendment proposed in sub-clause (a) of this clause is of
a consequential and drafting nature.

Sub-clause (c) of this clause seeks to amend the Explanation to sub-clause (2) of article 217 for
the purpose of removing an anomaly. Under clause (a) of the Explanation as it exists now, any
period during which a person has, after becoming an advocate, held judicial office or the office of
the member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of
law will be included in computing the period during which he has been an advocate for the purposes
of determining his eligibility for appointment as a Judge of a High Court. There is no
corresponding provision in the Explanation in relation to a person who started as a Judge without
being an advocate and who subsequently became an advocate or a member of a tribunal or the holder
of any post under the Union or a State requiring special knowledge of law.

22. Clause 29.—The proviso to article 225 of the Constitution as originally enacted was intended to
remove the bar that existed before the commencement of the Constitution in respect of the original
jurisdiction of the High Courts in revenue matters. The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act
omitted this proviso. This clause seeks to restore the said proviso.

23. Clause 30.—Subject to a modification, this clause seeks to restore, article 226 to the form in
which it was prior to its amendment by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. The
modification is for the purpose of providing that in cases in which an interim order is made, ex
parte, on or in any proceedings relating to a petition under article 226, the party against whom
such order is made may make an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and
furnish a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has been made or the
counsel of such party. It is also being provided that if the High Court fails to dispose of the
application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received by the High Court or
from the date on which the copy of such application is furnished to the party against whom it is
made, whichever is later, the interim order shall, on the expiry of the said period, stand vacated.
Where the High Court is closed on the last day of the said period, the interim order will stand
vacated only if the application is not disposed of before the expiry of the next day on which the
High Court is open.

24. Clause 31.—This clause seeks to restore article 227 of the Constitution (relating to power of
superintendence of High Court) to the form in which it was prior to its amendment by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act.

25. Clause 32.—See paragraph 12 above.

26. Clause 33.—This clause seeks to omit article 257A of the Constitution relating to deployment of
armed forces or other forces of the Union to States. The said article was inserted in the
Constitution by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act.

27. Clause 34.—See paragraph 1 above.

28. Clause 35.—This clause seeks to omit Part XIVA of the Constitution relating to administrative
tribunals and tribunals for other matters in place of High Courts. The said Part XIVA was inserted
by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act.

29. Clauses 36 and 37.—Clause 37 seeks to omit article 329A relating to special provisions as to
elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker. The said article 329A was
inserted by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975. The amendment to article 329
proposed in clause 36 is of a consequential nature and is for the purpose of omitting the reference
therein to article 329A.

30. Clause 38.—This clause seeks to amend article 352 relating to Proclamation of Emergency to
provide for various safeguards against abuse of powers under the article. In the first place, the
ground of "internal disturbance" is being substituted by the ground of "armed rebellion" to exclude
scope for Proclamation of Emergency in cases of internal disturbance not involving armed rebellion.
In the second place, it is being provided that the President shall not issue a Proclamation of
Emergency unless the decision of the Cabinet that such a Proclamation may be issued has been
communicated to him in writing. In the third place, it is being provided that a Proclamation of
Emergency would require to be approved within a period of one month (instead of two months as
provided at present) by resolution of both the Houses of Parliament and that such resolution should
be by a majority of the total membership of each House and not less than two-thirds of the majority
of the members present and voting in each House instead of a simple majority provided at present.
In the fourth place, it is being provided that for the continuance of the Emergency, approval by
resolution of both Houses would be required every six months. In the fifth place, provision is
being made that a Proclamation of Emergency would cease to be operative whenever a resolution to
that effect is adopted by the Lok Sabha by a simple majority of the members of the House present
and voting. It is also being provided that not less than one-tenth of the total membership of the
Lok Sabha may, by notice, requisition a meeting of the Lok Sabha for the purpose of considering the
continuance of a Proclamation of Emergency.

Provision has also been made for the omission of clause (5) of article 352, which was inserted by
the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975 and which makes the satisfaction of the
President as to the existence of a grave Emergency necessitating the issue of a Proclamation of
Emergency final.

31. Clause 39.—This clause seeks to amend article 356 of the Constitution relating to the
President's power to issue a Proclamation in case of failure of constitutional machinery in a
State. The article is being amended to specify that such a Proclamation will, upon its being
approved first by resolutions by both Houses, continue for six months from the date of issue of
Proclamation and that upon its being approved likewise on a second occasion, it would continue for
a further period of six months. The article is also being amended to specify that a resolution

with respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation under the article for any period beyond
the expiration of one year from the date of issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by
either House of Parliament unless a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation at the time of the
passing of such resolution and the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force of
the Proclamation under the article during the period specified in such resolution is necessary on
account of difficulties in holding elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
32. Clause 40.—This clause seeks to amend article 358 relating to the suspension of provisions of
article 19 during Emergencies. By virtue of the amendments, the provisions of article 19 will
become suspended only in the case of a Proclamation of Emergency issued on the ground of war or
external aggression and not in the case of a Proclamation of Emergency issued on the ground of
armed rebellion. Further, the suspension of article 19 under article 358 will not apply in relation
to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made or to any executive action taken otherwise
than under a law containing such a recital. 33. Clause 41.—This clause seeks to make two amendments
to article 359 of the Constitution relating to suspension of the enforcement of the rights
conferred by Part III during Emergencies. The first amendment is for providing that the enforcement
of the right to life and personal liberty under article 21 cannot be suspended. The second
amendment is for providing that the suspension of the enforcement of any right under the article
will not apply in relation to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law
is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made or to any executive
action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital. 34. Clause 42.—This clause seeks
to make two amendments in article 360 of the Constitution. The first amendment is of a drafting
nature and is for the purpose of making the provision of clause (2) of article 360 self-contained.
At present the said clause (2) incorporates by reference the provisions of clause (2) of article
352. Since clause (2) of article 352 is being amended, it has become necessary to make clause (2)
of article 360 self-contained. The second amendment is for omitting clause (5) of article 360 which
was inserted by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act and which makes the satisfaction of
the President as to the arising of a situation whereby the financial stability or credit of India
or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, final and conclusive. 35. Clause 43.—This
clause seeks to insert a new article 361A in the Constitution. The new article provides for
constitutional protection in respect of publication of proceedings of Parliament and of State
Legislatures. The protection will not be available in respect of proceedings of secret sittings.
36. Clause 44.—This clause seeks to amend article 366 of the Constitution to include therein
provisions for explaining the significance of the expressions “SECULAR” and “SOCIALIST” as used in
the Preamble.

37. Clause 45.--This clause seeks to amend article 368 of the Constitution relating to the power of
Parliament to amend the Constitution. Apart from omitting clauses (4) and (5) which were inserted
in the article by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, for taking away the
jurisdiction of the courts in respect of validity of constitutional amendments, this clause seeks
to provide that amendments which would have the effect of—

(a) impairing the secular or democratic character of the Constitution; or

(b) abridging or taking away the rights of citizens under Part III; or

(c) prejudicing or impeding free and fair elections to the House of the People or the Legislative
Assemblies of the States on the basis of adult suffrage; or

(d) compromising the independence of the judiciary,

would require to be approved by the people of India at a referendum. Any amendment for modifying or
omitting the requirement as to such referendum would also require to be approved at such a
referendum. In place of the existing clauses (4) and (5) of article 368, sub-clause (b) of clause
45 seeks to substitute three new clauses (4), (5) and (6). New clause (4) provides that every
referendum will be through a poll. All persons eligible to be voters at elections to Lok Sabha will
be eligible to vote. If fifty one per cent. or more of the eligible voters vote at such a poll and
a majority of the voters voting at such a poll approve an amendment, the amendment will be deemed
to have been approved. New clause (5) seeks to vest the superintendence, direction and control of
referenda in the Election Commission. The result of a referendum as declared by the Election
Commission will be final. New Clause (6) seeks to empower Parliament to provide by law for matters
relating to or in connection with referenda.

38. Clause 46.--See paragraph 9.

39. Clause 47.--This clause seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Sub-clause (a)
of this clause seeks to omit entry 2A of the Union List relating to deployment of armed forces of
the Union to States. The omission is consequential to the omission of article 257A (See paragraph
26 above).

Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend the State List. The amendments proposed in items (i) and (ii) to
entries 1 and 2 of the State List are consequential to the proposed omission of entry 2A of the
Union List. The amendments proposed in items (iii) and (iv) are for including the entries relating
to education and forest in the State List and for restoring the position as it obtained before the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. The amendment in item (v) to entry 41 of the State List
is consequential to the insertion of a new entry 11B in the Concurrent List under sub-clause (c)
(i).

Sub-clause (c).-Item (i) of this sub-clause seeks to insert a new entry relating to adjudication or
trial by tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service
of persons

appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of a State or of a local or
other authority subject to the control of a State Government. The proposed entry and entry 70 of
the Union List will facilitate the creation of common tribunals for adjudication or trial of
disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed
to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of a State or of a local or other
authority subject to the control of a Central Government or a State Government.

Item (ii) of sub-clause (c) seeks to omit entry 17A of the Concurrent List relating to forests and
it is consequential to the inclusion of forests in the State List.

Item (iii) of sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute a new entry for entry 25 of the Concurrent List
and it is consequential to the inclusion of education in the State List.

40. Clause 48.—This clause seeks to amend the Ninth Schedule for omitting entries 87 [the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974, and
the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975], 92 (the Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971) and
130 (the Prevention of Publication of Objectionable Matter Act, 1976).

41. Clause 49.—Sections 18, 19, 21, 22, 31, 32, 34 and 35 of the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, have not been brought into force. In addition to omitting these sections, this
clause seeks to omit section 58 (special provisions as to pending petitions under article 226) and
section 59 (power of the President to remove difficulties) of the said Act.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

*

19. (1) All citizens shall have the right—

* * * * *

(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; (f) to acquire, hold and dispose of
property; and * * * * *

(5) Nothing in sub-clauses (d), (e) and (f) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in the
interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.

* * * * *

22. (1) * * * * *

(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a
longer period than three months unless—

(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed
as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months
that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:

Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the
maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or

(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any law made by Parliament under
sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).

* * * * *

(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—

(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases in which, a person may be
detained for a period longer than three months under any law providing for preventive detention
without obtaining the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause
(a) of clause (4);

(b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class or classes of cases be detained under
any law providing for preventive detention; and

(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an inquiry under sub-clause (a) of clause
(4).

* * * * *

Right to Property

31. (1) No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.

(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned save for a public purpose and save
by authority of a law which provides for acquisition, or requisitioning of the property for an
amount which may be fixed by such law or which may be determined in accordance with such principles
and given in such manner as may be specified in such law; and no such law shall be called in
question in any court on the ground that the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate or that
the whole or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in cash:

Provided that in making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of any property of an
educational institution established and administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1) of
article 30, the State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such law for the
acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under
that clause.

(2A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownership or right to possession of any
property to the State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed
to provide for the compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding that it
deprives any person of his property.

(2B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of article 19 shall affect any such law as is referred
to in clause (2).

(3) No such law as is referred to in clause (2) made by the Legislature of a State shall have
effect unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received
his assent.

(4) If any Bill pending at the commencement of this Constitution in the Legislature of a State has,
after it has been passed by such Legislature, been reserved for the consideration of the President
and has received his assent, then, notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the law so
assented to shall not be called in question in any court on the ground that it contravenes the
provisions of clause (2).

(5) Nothing in clause (2) shall affect—

(a) the provisions of any existing law other than a law to which the provisions of clause (6)
apply, or

(b) the provisions of any law which the State may hereafter make—

(i) for the purpose of imposing or levying any tax or penalty, or

(ii) for the promotion of public health or the prevention of danger to life or property, or

(iii) in pursuance of any agreement entered into between the Government of the Dominion of India or
the Government of India and the Government of any other country, or otherwise, with respect to
property declared by law to be evacuee property.

(6) Any law of the State enacted not more than eighteen months before the commencement of this
Constitution may within three months from such commencement be submitted to the President for his
certification; and thereupon, if the President by public notification so certifies, it shall not be
called in question in any court on the ground that it con-

travenes the provisions of clause (2) of this article or has contravened the provisions of
sub-section (2) of section 299 of the Government of India Act, 1935.

Saving of Certain Laws

31A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 3, no law providing for—

(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights, or (b) the taking over of the management of any property by the
State for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the proper
management of the property, or (c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the
public interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the corporations, or (d) the
extinguishment or modification of any rights of manag- ing agents, secretaries and treasurers,
managing directors, directors or managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
thereof, or (e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by virtue of any
agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral
oil, or the pre- mature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence,

shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges
any of the rights conferred by article 14, article 19 or article 31:

Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of this
article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the
President, has received his assent:

Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the acquisition by the State of any
estate and where any land comprised therein is held by a person under his personal cultivation, it
shall not be lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling
limit applicable to him under any law for the time being in force or any building or structure
standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the acquisition of such land,
building or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a rate which shall not be less than
the market value thereof.

31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the policy of the
State towards securing all or any of the prin- ciples laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be
void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights
conferred by article 14, article 19 or article 31: and no law containing a declaration that it is
for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it
does not give effect to such policy:

Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article
shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for the consideration of the
President, has received his assent.

38. The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as
effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform
all the institutions of the national life.

* * * * *

71. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter
relating to or connected with the election of a President or Vice-President, including the grounds
on which such election may be questioned:

Provided that the election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be called in
question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the
electoral college electing him.

(2) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or
Vice-President shall be inquired into and decided by such authority or body and in such manner as
may be provided for by or under any law referred to in clause (1).

(3) The validity of any such law as is referred to in clause (1) and the decision of any authority
or body under such law shall not be called in question in any court.

(4) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void under any such law
as is referred to in clause (1), acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and
duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before the date of
such declaration shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.

* * * * *

74. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise
the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.

* * * * *

77. (1) * * * * *

(4) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the production of any rules made under
clause (3) for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India.

* * * * *

83. (1) * * * * *

(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for six years from the date
appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said period of six years
shall operate as a dissolution of the House:

Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case
beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

* * * *

103. (1) If any question arises— (a) as to whether a member of either House of Parliament has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, or (b) as to
whether a person, found guilty of a corrupt practice at an election to a House of Parliament under
any law made by Parliament, shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
either House of Parliament, or of a House of the Legis- lature of a State, or as to the period for
which he shall be so disquali- fied, or as to the removal of, or the reduction of the period of,
such disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his
decision shall be final.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall consult the Election
Commission and the Election Commission may, for this purpose, make such inquiry as it thinks fit.

* * * * * 105. (1) * * * * * (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each
House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House, shall be such as may from
time to time be defined by Parlia- ment by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the House
of Com- mons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the
commencement of this Constitution. * * * * * 123. (1) * * * * * (4) Notwithstanding anything in
this Constitution, the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground. * * * * * 132. (1) An appeal
shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the
territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, if the High Court certifies
that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.

(2) Where the High Court has refused to give such a certificate, the Supreme Court may, if it is
satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution, grant special leave to appeal from such judgment, decree or final order.

(3) Where such a certificate is given, or such leave is granted, any party in the case may appeal
to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided
and, with the leave of the Supreme Court, on any other ground.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the expression “final order" includes an order
deciding an issue which, if decided in favour of the appellant, would be sufficient for the final
disposal of the case.

133. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg- ment, decree or final order in a
civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies—

(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and

(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme
Court.

* * * * *

134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg- ment, final order or sentence in a
criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—

* * * * *

(c) certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court:

Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such provisions as may be made in
that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may establish
or require.

* * * * *

139A. (1) If, on an application made by the Attorney-General of India, the Supreme Court is
satisfied that cases involving the same or substantially the same questions of law are pending
before it and one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and that such questions are
substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases
pending before the High Court or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself.

* * * * *

150. The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may,
after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribe.

* * * * *

166. (1) * * * * * (4) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the pro- duction of
any rules made under clause (3) for the more convenient transaction of the business of the
Government of the State.

* * * * *

172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for six
years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of six years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly: Provided that the said period
may, while a Proclamation of Emer- gency is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a
period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case be- yond a period of six
months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

192. (1) If any question arises— (a) as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a
State has become subject to any of the disqualifications men- tioned in clause (1) of article 191,
or (b) as to whether a person, found guilty of a corrupt practice at an election to a House of the
Legislature of a State under any law made by Parliament, shall be disqualified for being chosen as,
and for being, a member of either House of Parliament or of a House or the Legislature of a State,
or as to the period for which he shall be so disqualified, or as to the removal of, or the
reduction of the period of, such disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision
of the President and his decision shall be final. (2) Before giving any decision on any such
question, the President shall consult the Election Commission and the Election Commission may, for
this purpose, make such inquiry as it thinks fit.

194. (1) (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the Legislature
of a State, and of the members and the com- mittees of a House of such Legislature, shall be such
as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, shall be
those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and
committees, at the commencement of this Constitution,

213. (1) (4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the Governor
mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on
any ground.

217. (1) (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless he
is a citizen of India and— (b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or of
two or more such Courts in succession; or

(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist. Explanation.—For the purposes of
this clause—

(a) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, there shall
be included any period during which the person (has held judicial office or the office of a member
of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring spe- cial knowledge of law) after
he became an advocate;

(b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of
India or been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period before the com-
mencement of this Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which was
comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government of
India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.

225. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the
appropriate Legislature made, by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this
Constitution, the jurisdic- tion of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the
respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court,
including any power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members
thereof sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the com-
mencement of this Constitution.

226. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32, every High Court shall have power, throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority,
including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibi- tion, quo warranto and
certiorari, or any of them,—

(a) for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by the provisions of Part III; or

(b) for the redress of any injury of a substantial nature by reason of the contravention of any
other provision of this Constitu- tion or any provision of any enactment or Ordinance or any order,
rule, regulation, bye-law or other instrument made thereunder; or

(c) for the redress of any injury by reason of any illegality in any proceedings by or before any
authority under any provision referred to in sub-clause (b) where such illegality has resulted in
substantial failure of justice.

(3) No petition for the redress of any injury referred to in sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of
clause (1) shall be entertained if any other remedy for such redress is provided for by or under
any other law for the time being in force.

(4) No interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made
on, or in any proceedings relating to, a petition under clause (1) unless—

(a) copies of such petition and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order
are furnished to the party against whom such petition is filed or proposed to be filed; and

(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.

(5) The High Court may dispense with the requirements of sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (4) and
make an interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded in
writing that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the petitioner which
cannot be adequately compensated in money but any such interim order shall, if it is not vacated
earlier, cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it
is made unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that period and
the High Court has continued the operation of the interim order.

(6) Notwithstanding anything in clause (4) or clause (5) no interim order (whether by way of
injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a
petition under clause (1) where such order will have the effect of delaying any inquiry into a
matter of public importance or any investigation or inquiry into an offence punishable with
imprisonment or any action for the execution of any work or project of public utility, or the
acquisition of any property for such execution, by the Government or any corporation owned or
controlled by the Government.

* * * * *

227. (1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts subject to its appellate
jurisdiction.

* * * * *

(5) Nothing in this article shall be construed as giving to a High Court any jurisdiction to
question any judgment of any inferior court which is not otherwise subject to appeal or revision.

* * * * *

239B. (1) * * * * *

(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the administrator mentioned
in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground.

* * * * *

257A. (1) The Government of India may deploy any armed force of the Union or any other force
subject to the control of the Union for dealing with any grave situation of law and order in any
State.

(2) Any armed force or other force or any contingent or unit thereof deployed under clause (1) in
any State shall act in accordance with such directions as the Government of India may issue and
shall not, save as otherwise provided in such directions, be subject to the superintendence

or control of the Government or any officer or authority sub-ordinate to the State Government.

(3) Parliament may, by law, specify the powers, functions, privileges and liabilities of the
members of any force or any contingent or unit thereof deployed under clause (1) during the period
of such deployment.

PART XIVA TRIBUNALS

323A. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals
of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State
or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government.

(2) A law made under clause (1) may— (a) provide for the establishment of an administrative
tribunal for the Union and a separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more
States; (b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and
authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; (c) provide for the procedure
(including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
article 136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1); (e) provide for
the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any cases pending before any court or other
authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the
jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are based
had arisen after such establishment; (f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under
clause (3) of article 371D; (g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions
(including provisions as to fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the effective functioning
of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the order of, such tribunals.

(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other
provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.

323B. (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by
tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters
specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.

(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:— (a) levy, assessment,
collection and enforcement of any tax; (b) foreign exchange, import and export across customs
frontiers; (c) industrial and labour disputes; (d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State
of any estate as defined in article 31A or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural land or in any other way; (e)
ceiling on urban property; (f) elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or either
House of the Legislature of a State, but excluding the matters referred to in article 329 and
article 329A; (g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs (including edible
oilseeds and oils) and such other goods as the President may, by public notification, declare to be
essential goods for the purpose of this article and control of prices of such goods; (h) offences
against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) and fees in
respect of any of those matters; (i) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (h).

(3) A law made under clause (1) may— (a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority
which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; (c) provide for the procedure (including
provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals; (d)
exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article
136, with respect to all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said
tribunals; (e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending before any court
or any other authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been
within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings
are based had arisen after such establishment; (f) contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions (including provisions as to fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem
necessary for the effective functioning of, and for

the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.

(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other
provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.

Explanation.—In this article, "appropriate Legislature", in relation to any matter, means
Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legis- lature competent to make laws with respect to
such matter in accord- ance with the provisions of Part XI.

* * * *

329. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to the provisions of article 329A—

(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of consti- tuencies or the allotment of
seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall
not be called in question in any court;

(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of
a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and
in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature.

329A. (1) Subject to the provisions of Chapter II of Part V [except sub-clause (e) of clause (1) of
article 102], no election—

(a) to either House of Parliament of a person who holds the office of Prime Minister at the time of
such election or is appointed as Prime Minister after such election;

(b) to the House of the People of a person who holds the office of Speaker of that House at the
time of such election or who is chosen as the Speaker for that House after such election;

shall be called in question, except before such authority [not being any such authority as is
referred to in clause (b) of article 329] or body and in such manner as may be provided for by or
under any law made by Parliament and any such law may provide for all other matters relating to
doubts and disputes in relation to such election including the grounds on which such election may
be questioned.

(2) The validity of any such law as is referred to in clause (1) and the decision of any authority
or body under such law shall not be called in question in any court.

(3) Where any person is appointed as Prime Minister or, as the case may be, chosen to the office of
the Speaker of the House of the People, while an election petition referred to in clause (b) of
article 329 in respect of his election to either House of Parliament or, as the case may be, to the
House of the People is pending, such election petition shall abate upon such person being appointed
as Prime Minister or, as the case may be, being chosen to the office of the Speaker of the House of
the People, but such election may be called in question under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1).

(4) No law made by Parliament before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment)
Act, 1975, in so far as it relates to election petitions and matters connected therewith, shall
apply or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to the election of any such person
as is referred to in clause (1) to either House of Parliament and such election shall not be deemed
to be void or ever to have become void on any ground on which such election could be declared to be
void or has, before such commencement, been declared to be void under any such law and
notwithstanding any order made by any court, before such commencement, declaring such election to
be void, such election shall continue to be valid in all respects and any such order and any
finding on which such order is based shall be and shall be deemed always to have been void and of
no effect.

(5) Any appeal or cross appeal against any such order of any court as is referred to in clause (4)
pending immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975,
before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the provisions of clause (4).

(6) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in this
Constitution.

Proclamation of Emergency. 352. (1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists
whereby the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war
or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that
effect in respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be
specified in the Proclamation.

(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)——

(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation;

(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament;

(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months unless before the expiration of that
period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament:

Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the House of the People has been
dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during the period of two months
referred to in sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by
the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate
at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after
its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.

(2A) Where a Proclamation issued under clause (1) is varied by a subsequent Proclamation, the
provisions of clause (2) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such subsequent Proclamation
as they apply in relation to a Proclamation issued under clause (1).

(3) A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or of any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression or by internal disturbance may be
made before the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or disturbance if the President
is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.

(4) The power conferred on the President by this article shall include the power to issue different
Proclamations on different grounds, being war or external aggression or internal disturbance or
imminent danger of war or external aggression or internal disturbance whether or not there is a
Proclamation already issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in
operation.

(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

(a) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) and clause (3) shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground;

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (2), neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall
have jurisdiction to entertain any question, on any ground, regarding the validity of—

(i) a declaration made by Proclamation by the President to the effect stated in clause (1); or

(ii) the continued operation of such Proclamation.

* * * * *

356. (1) * * * * *

(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a
period of one year from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the
Proclamation under clause (3):

Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a
Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked,
continue in force for a further period of one year from the date on which under this clause it
would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation shall in any case remain in force
for more than three years:

Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such
period of one year and a resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has
been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of
such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said period, the
Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said
period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation has been
also passed by the House of the People.

(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the President mentioned in
clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground.

* * * * *

358. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in article 19 shall restrict the
power of the State as defined in Part III to make any law or to take any executive action which the
State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any
law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the
Proclamation ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law
so ceases to have effect:

Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory
of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under this article
in relation to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation
of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of
India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

359. (1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may by order declare that
the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of the rights conferred by Part III as may
be men- tioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the
rights so mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force
or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order.

(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of the rights conferred by Part III is in
operation, nothing in that Part confer- ring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as
defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but
for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made
shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the order aforesaid
ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to
have effect:

Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory
of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under this article
in relation to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation
of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of
India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.

360. (1) * * * * *

(2) The provisions of clause (2) of article 352 shall apply in relation to a Proclamation issued
under this article as they apply in relation to a Proclamation of Emergency issued under article
352. * * * * *

(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

(a) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and
shall not be questioned in any court on any ground;

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (2), neither the Supreme Court nor any other Court shall
have jurisdiction to entertain any question, on any ground, regarding the validity of— (i) a
declaration made by Proclamation by the President to the effect stated in clause (1); or (ii) the
continued operation of such Proclamation.

***

368. (2) An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for
the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority
of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent
to the Bill and thereupon the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the
Bill: Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in— (a) article 54, article 55,
article 73, article 162 or article 241, or (b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or
Chapter I of Part XI, or (c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or (d) the representation of
States in Parliament, or (e) the provisions of this article. the amendment shall also require to be
ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect
passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amend- ment is presented to
the President for assent.

***

(4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to
have been made under this article [whether before or after the commencement of section 55 of the
Consti- tution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question in any court on any
ground.

(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on
the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions
of this Constitution under this article.

***

371F. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— *** (c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to
be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under clause (b), the references to the period
of six years in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as references to a period of five
years and the said period of five years shall be deemed to commence from the appointed day; ***

SEVENTH SCHEDULE [Article 246]

List I—Union List

2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the control of the
Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power; powers,
jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment.

List II—State List

1. Public order (but not including the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed
force of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent
or unit thereof in aid of the civil power).

2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provi- sions of entry 2A of List I.

41. State public services; State Public Service Commission.

List III—Concurrent List

17A. Forests.

25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the
provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour.

NINTH SCHEDULE [Article 31B]

87. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of 1951), the Representation of the
People (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Central Act 58 of 1974) and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975
(Central Act 40 of 1975).

92. The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 (Central Act 26 of 1971).

130. The Prevention of Publication of Objectionable Matter Act, 1976 (Central Act 27 of 1976).

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-SECOND AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976

* * * * *

18. In article 100 of the Constitution, clauses (3) and (4) shall be omitted.

* * * * *

19. In article 102 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the following sub-clause
shall be substituted, namely:— “(a) if he holds any such office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State as is declared by Parliament by law to disqualify its
holder;”.

* * * * *

21. In article 105 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:— “(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament,
and of the members and the committees of each House, shall be those of that House, and of its
members and committees, at the commencement of section 21 of the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, and as may be evolved by such House of Parliament from time to time.”.

* * * * *

22. In article 118 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words “its procedure”, the
brackets and words “(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)” shall be inserted.

* * * * *

31. In article 189 of the Constitution, clauses (3) and (4) shall be omitted.

* * * * *

32. In article 191 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the following sub-clause
shall be substituted, namely:— “(a) if he holds any such office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule as is declared by Parliament
by law to disqualify its holder;”.

* * * * *

34. In article 194 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:— “(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the
Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a House of such Legislature, shall
be those of that House, and of its members and committees, at the commencement of section 34 of the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, and as may be evolved by such House of the
Legislature of a State, so far as may be, in accordance with those of the House of the People, and
of its members and committees where such House is the Legislative Assembly and in accordance with
those of the Council of States, and of its members and committees where such House is the
Legislative Council.”.

Amendment of article 208.

35. In article 208 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words "its procedure", the
brackets and words "(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)" shall be inserted.

* * * * *

Special provisions as to pending petitions under article 226.

58. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, every petition made under article
226 of the Constitution before the appointed day and pending before any High Court immediately
before that day (such petition being referred to in this section as 'a pending petition') and any
interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) made on, or in any
proceedings relating to, such petition before that day shall be dealt with in accordance with the
provisions of article 226 as substituted by section 38.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provi- sions of sub-section (1),
every pending petition before a High Court which would not have been admitted by the High Court
under the provisions of article 226 as substituted by section 38 if such petition had been made
after the appointed day, shall abate and any interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or
in any other manner) made on, or in any proceed- ings relating to, such petition shall stand
vacated:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the right of the petitioner to
seek relief under any other law for the time being in force in respect of the matters to which such
petition relates and in com- puting the period of limitation, if any, for seeking such relief, the
period during which the proceedings relating to such petition were pending in the High Court shall
be excluded.

(3) Every interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) which was
made before the appointed day, on, or in any proceedings relating to, a pending petition [not being
a pending petition which has abated under sub-section (2)], and which is in force on that day,
shall, unless before the appointed day copies of such pend- ing petition and of documents in
support of the plea for such interim order had been furnished to the party against whom such
interim order was made and an opportunity had been given to such party to be heard in the matter,
cease to have effect (if not vacated earlier),—

(a) on the expiry of a period of one month from the appointed day, if the copies of such pending
petition and the documents in support of the plea for the interim order are not furnished to such
party before the expiry of the said period of one month; or

(b) on the expiry of a period of four months from the appointed day, if the copies referred to in
clause (a) have been furnished to such party within the period of one month referred to in that
clause but such party has not been given an opportunity to be heard in the matter before the expiry
of the said period of four months.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), every interim order (whether by way of
injunction or stay or in any other manner) which was made before the appointed day on or in any
proceed- ings relating to a pending petition [not being a pending petition which has abated under
sub-section (2)], and which is in force on that day, shall, if such order has the effect of
delaying any inquiry into a matter of public importance or any investigation or inquiry into an
offence

punishable with imprisonment or any action for the execution of any work or project of public
utility, or the acquisition of any property for such execution, by the Government or any
corporation owned or controlled by the Government, stand vacated.

Explanation.—In this section, "appointed day" means the date on which section 38 comes into force.

59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Constitution as amended
by this Act (including any difficulty in relation to the transition from the provisions of the
Constitution as they stood im- mediately before the date of the President's assent to this Act to
the pro- visions of the Constitution as amended by this Act), the President may, by order, make
such provisions, including any adaptation or modification of any provision of the Constitution, as
appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of such
assent.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.

LOK SABHA

BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Shanti Bhushan, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)
