LOK SABHA --- CORRIGENDA to THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 [To be/As
introduced in Lok Sabha]

1. Page 1, line 8,- after "article 32" insert "of the Constitution"

2. Page 2, line 19,- after "article 226" insert "of the Constitution"

NEW DELHI; December 14, 1977 Agrahayana 23, 1899 (Saka)

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 6 DEC 1977

Bill No. 148 of 1977

THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1977. 2. Article 31D of
the Constitution shall be omitted. 3. (1) Article 32A of the Constitution shall be omitted. (2) Any
proceedings pending before the Supreme Court under article 32 immediately before the commencement
of this Act may be dealt with by the Supreme Court as if the said article 32A had been omitted with
effect on and from the 1st day of February, 1977. 4. (1) Article 131A of the Constitution shall be
omitted. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where immediately before the
commencement of this Act any reference made by a High Court under the said article 131A is pending
before the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court may, having regard to— (a) the stage at which the
reference is so pending; and

(b) the ends of justice, either deal with the case as if that article had not been omitted or
return the case to the High Court for disposal as if that article had been omitted with effect on
and from the 1st day of February, 1977.

5. (1) Article 144A of the Constitution shall be omitted. (2) Any case pending before the Supreme
Court immediately before the commencement of this Act may be dealt with by the Supreme Court as if
the said article 144A had been omitted with effect on and from the 1st day of February, 1977.

6. In article 145 of the Constitution,— (a) in clause (1), in sub-clause (cc), for the words,
figures and letters "articles 131A and 139A", the word, figures and letter "article 139A" shall be
substituted; (b) in clause (2), the words, figures and letter "article 144A and of" shall be
omitted; (c) in clause (3), the words, figures and letter "Subject to the provisions of article
144A," shall be omitted.

7. (1) Article 226A of the Constitution shall be omitted. (2) Any proceedings pending before a High
Court under article 226 immediately before the commencement of this Act may be dealt with by the
High Court as if the said article 226A had been omitted with effect on and from the 1st day of
February, 1977.

8. In article 228 of the Constitution, in the opening portion, the words, figures and letter ",
subject to the provisions of article 131A," shall be omitted.

9. (1) Article 228A of the Constitution shall be omitted. (2) Any case pending before a High Court
immediately before the commencement of this Act may be dealt with by the High Court as if the said
article 228A had been omitted with effect on and from the 1st day of February, 1977.

10. In article 366 of the Constitution, clause (4A) and clause (26A) shall be omitted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, inserted various articles in the Constitution
to curtail, both directly and indirect- ly, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts to review the constitutionality of laws. Article 32A barred the Supreme Court from
considering the constitutional validity of any State law in proceed- ings for the enforcement of
fundamental rights unless the constitu- tional validity of any Central law was also in issue in
such proceedings. Article 131A gave to the Supreme Court exclusive jurisdiction to decide the
constitutional validity of a Central law and thus deprived the High Courts of their jurisdiction in
respect of the same. Article 144A pro- vided that the minimum number of Judges of the Supreme Court
who shall sit for the purpose of determining the constitutional validity of any Central law or
State law shall be seven and required a special majority of two-thirds for the invalidation of such
law. Article 226A barred the High Courts from deciding the validity of any Central law and article
228A required that there should be a Bench of at least five Judges for determining the
constitutional validity of any State law and prescribed a special majority for a judgment
invalidating such a law.

2. It is considered that articles 32A, 131A and 228A cause hardship to persons living in distant
parts in India. Further, article 32A would lead to multiplicity of proceedings as cases relating to
the validity of a State law which could be disposed of by the Supreme Court itself have to be heard
first by the High Court. The minimum number of Judges in every case wherein the constitutional
validity of a law is involved, however unsubstantial the challenge might be, results in valuable
judicial time being lost in hearing and rejecting submissions that have no substance. The Supreme
Court has, in M/s. Misrilal Jain vs. the State of Orissa and Others (AIR 1977 SC 1686) expressed
the hope that article 144A would engage the prompt attention of Parlia- ment and would be amended
so as to leave to the court itself the duty to decide how large a Bench should decide any
particular case. In fact, a number of cases have been held up in the Supreme Court and High Courts
as a result of the aforementioned articles.

3. It is, therefore, proposed to omit articles 32A, 131A, 144A, 226A and 228A. It is also proposed
to make special provisions to enable the Supreme Court and the High Courts to deal with pending
cases in the same manner as if the said articles had been omitted with effect from the 1st
February, 1977 (viz., the date on which those articles were brought into force). Necessary
consequential amendments to articles 145, 228 and 366 are also proposed to be made.

4. Article 31D confers special power on Parliament to enact certain laws in respect of
anti-national activities. It is considered that these powers of Parliament to make laws for dealing
with anti-national activities and anti-national associations are of a sweeping nature and are
capable of abuse. It is, therefore, proposed to omit article 31D.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

NEW DELHI; SHANTI BHUSHAN. The 12th December, 1977.

ANNEXURE EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

31D. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing for—

(a) the prevention or prohibition of anti-national activities; or

(b) the prevention of formation of, or the prohibition of, anti- national associations,

shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges
any of the rights conferred by, article 14, article 19 or article 31.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a
State shall not have, power to make laws with respect to any of the matters referred to in
sub-clause (a) or sub- clause (b) of clause (1).

(3) Any law with respect to any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause
(1) which is in force immediately before the commencement of section 5 of the Constitution
(Forty-second Amend- ment) Act, 1976, shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended
by Parliament.

(4) In this article,—

(a) "association" means an association of persons;

(b) "anti-national activity", in relation to an individual or asso- ciation, means any action taken
by such individual or association—

(i) which is intended, or which supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the
cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India or
which incites any individual or association to bring about such cession or secession;

(ii) which disclaims, questions, threatens, disrupts or is intended to threaten or disrupt the
sovereignty and integrity of India or the security of the State or the unity of the nation;

(iii) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme which is intended, to overthrow by force the
Government as by law established;

(iv) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme which is intended, to create internal
disturbance or the disruption of public services;

(v) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme which is intended, to threaten or disrupt
harmony between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities;

(c) "anti-national association" means an association— (i) which has for its object any
anti-national activity; (ii) which encourages or aids persons to undertake or engage in any
anti-national activity; (iii) the members whereof undertake or engage in any anti-national
activity.

* * * * *

32A. Notwithstanding anything in article 32, the Supreme Court shall not consider the
constitutional validity of any State law in any proceedings under that article unless the
constitutional validity of any Central law is also in issue in such proceedings.

* * * * *

131A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Constitution, the
Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have jurisdiction to determine all
questions relating to the constitutional validity of any Central law.

(2) Where a High Court is satisfied— (a) that a case pending before it or before a court
subordinate to it involves questions as to the constitutional validity of any Central law or, as
the case may be, of both Central and State laws; and (b) that the determination of such questions
is necessary for the disposal of the case, the High Court shall refer the questions for the
decision of the Supreme Court.

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (2), where, on an application made by the
Attorney-General of India, the Supreme Court is satisfied,— (a) that a case pending before a High
Court or before a court subordinate to a High Court involves questions as to the constitutional
validity of any Central law or, as the case may be, of both Central and State laws; and

(b) that the determination of such questions is necessary for the disposal of the case,

the Supreme Court may require the High Court to refer the questions to it for its decision.

(4) When a reference is made under clause (2) or clause (3), the High Court shall stay all
proceedings in respect of the case until the Supreme Court decides the questions so referred.

(5) The Supreme Court shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide the
questions so referred, and may—

(a) either dispose of the case itself; or

(b) return the case to the High Court together with a copy of its judgment on such questions for
disposal of the case in conformity with such judgment by the High Court or, as the case may be, the
court subordinate to it.

* * * * *

144A. (1) The minimum number of Judges of the Supreme Court who shall sit for the purpose of
determining any question as to the constitu- tional validity of any Central law or State law shall
be seven.

(2) A Central law or a State law shall not be declared to be constitu- tionally invalid by the
Supreme Court unless a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Judges sitting for the purpose
of determining the ques- tion as to the constitutional validity of such law hold it to be constitu-
tionally invalid.

145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time
to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and
procedure of the Court including—

* * * * *

(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under articles 131A and 139A;

* * * * *

(2) Subject to the provisions of article 144A and of clause (3), rules made under this article may
fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and may provide for the powers of
single Judges and Division Courts.

(3) Subject to the provisions of article 144A, the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for the
purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of
this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference under article 143 shall be five:

Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the provisions of this Chapter other
than article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal
the Court is satisfied that the appeal involves a substantial question of law as to the interpreta-

tion of this Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the appeal,
such Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause
for the purpose of decid- ing any case involving such a question and shall on receipt of the
opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity with such opinion.

* * * * *

226A. Notwithstanding anything in article 226, the High Court shall not consider the constitutional
validity of any Central law in any proceed- ings under that article.

* * * * *

228. If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a court sub- ordinate to it involves a
substantial question of law as to the interpre- tation of this Constitution the determination of
which is necessary for the disposal of the case, it shall withdraw the case and, subject to the
provi- sions of article 131A, may—

(a) either dispose of the case itself, or

(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from which the case has
been so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question, and the said court shall
on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.

228A. (1) No High Court shall have jurisdiction to declare any Cen- tral law to be constitutionally
invalid.

(2) Subject to the provisions of article 131A, the High Court may determine all questions relating
to the constitutional validity of any State law.

(3) The minimum number of Judges who shall sit for the purpose of determining any question as to
the constitutional validity of any State law shall be five:

Provided that where the High Court consists of less than five Judges, all the Judges of the High
Court may sit and determine such question.

(4) A State law shall not be declared to be constitutionally invalid by the High Court unless—

(a) where the High Court consists of five Judges or more, not less than two-thirds of the Judges
sitting for the purpose of deter- mining the validity of such law, hold it to be constitutionally
invalid; and

(b) where the High Court consists of less than five Judges, all the Judges of the High Court
sitting for the purpose hold it to be consti- tutionally invalid.

(5) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in this
Part.

Explanation.—In computing the number of Judges of a High Court for the purposes of this article, a
Judge who is disqualified by reason of personal or pecuniary bias shall be excluded.

* * * * *

366. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the following expressions have
the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say—

* * * * *

(4A) "Central law" means any law other than a State law but does not include any amendment of this
Constitution made under article 368;

* * * * *

(26A) "State law" means—

(a) a State Act or an Act of the Legislature of a Union territory;

(b) an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a State under article 213 or by the administrator
of a Union territory under article 239B;

(c) any provision with respect to a matter in the State List in a Central Act made before the
commencement of this Consti- tution;

(d) any provision with respect to a matter in the State List or the Concurrent List in a Provincial
Act;

(e) any notification, order, scheme, rule, regulation or bye- law or any other instrument having
the force of law made under any Act, Ordinance or provisions referred to in sub-clause (a),
sub-clause (b), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d);

(f) any notification, order, scheme, rule, regulation or bye- law or any other instrument having
the force of law, not falling under sub-clause (e), and made by a State Government or the
administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority sub- ordinate to such Government or
administrator; and

(g) any other law (including any usage or custom having the force of law) with respect to a matter
in the State List;

* * * * *

LOK SABHA

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Shanti Bhushan, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.)
