REGISTERED No. D-(D)-72 The Gazette of India EXTRAORDINARY PART II-Section 2 PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY No. 50] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 22, 1984/SRAVANA 31, 1906 Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation LOK SABHA The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 22nd August, 1984 - BILL No. 80 OF 1984 A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1984.
2. For article 33 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:-
"33. Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to,-
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or
(c) the members of the Forces charged with the protection of property belonging to, or in the charge or possession of, the State; or
(d) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(e) persons employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation referred to in clause (a) to (d),
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.".
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
By article 33 of the Constitution, Parliament is empowered to enact laws determining to what extent any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution shall, in their application to the members of the Armed Forces or the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them.
2. It is proposed to amend article 33 so as to bring within its ambit-
(i) the members of the Forces charged with the protection of property belonging to, or in the charge or possession of, the State; or
(ii) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(iii) persons employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation.
Experience has revealed that the need for ensuring proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them is of paramount importance in the national interest.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
New Delhi; P. V. NARASIMHA RAO.
The 18th August, 1984.
SUBHASH C. KASHYAP, Secretary-General.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 1984
