C. B. No. 154

LOK SABHA

THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963

Report of the Joint Committee

(Presented on the 18th March, 1963)

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI

March, 1963 Phalguna, 1884 (Saka) Price: 35 nP.

JOINT/SELECT COMMITTEE REPORTS PRESENTED TO LOK SABHA DURING THE YEAR 1963.

Sl.No. Name of the Report Date of Presentation.

1. The Administrators-General Bill, 1962 25-1-1963 (Report of the Select Committee) 2. The
Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) 8-3-1963 Bill, 1962 (Report of Joint Committee) 3. Joint
Committee on the Constitution -do- (Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 1962 - EVIDENCE. 4. The Constitution
(Sixteenth Amendment) 16-3-1963 Bill, 1963 (Report of the Joint Committee) 5. The Government of
Union Territories Bill, 15-4-1963 1963 (Report of the Joint Committee) 6. The Major Port Trusts
Bill, 1962 13-8-1963 (Report of the Select Committee) 7. Select Committee on the Major Port Trusts
-do- Bill, 1962 - EVIDENCE 8. The Christian Marriage and Matrimonial 26-11-1963 Causes Bill, 1962
(Report of the Joint Committee) 9. Joint Committee on the Christian Marriage -do- and Matrimonial
Causes Bill, 1962 - EVIDENCE. 10. The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 1963 9-12-1963 (Report of the
Select Committee) 11. Select Committee on the Companies (Amend- -do- ment) Bill, 1963 - EVIDENCE.
12. The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) 18-12-1963 Amendment Bill, 1963 (Report of the Joint
Committee)

******

CONTENTS

PAGE

1. Composition of Joint Committee ... ... (iii)

2. Report of the Joint Committee ... ... (v)

3. Minutes of Dissent ... ... ... (vii)

4. Bill as reported by the Joint Committee ... ... 1

APPENDIX I—

Motion in Lok Sabha for reference of the Bill to Joint Committee ... ... ... 4

APPENDIX II—

Motion in Rajya Sabha ... ... 6

APPENDIX III—

Minutes of the sittings of the Joint Committee ... ... 7

THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 Composition of the Joint Committee

Lok Sabha

Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao—Chairman

MEMBERS

2. Shri Brij Raj Singh-Kotah 3. Shri S. N. Chaturvedi 4. Shri Homi F. Daji 5. Shri Ram Dhani Das 6.
Shri R. Dharmalingam 7. Shri Kashi Ram Gupta 8. Sardar Iqbal Singh 9. Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao
Jadhav 10. Shri Madeppa Bandappa Kadadi 11. Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath 12. Shri Paresh Nath Kayal 13.
Shri Nihar Ranjan Laskar 14. Shri Harekrushna Mahatab 15. Shri M. Malaichami 16. Shri Mathew
Maniyangadan 17. Shri Bibudhendra Misra 18. Shri F. H. Mohsin 19. Shri H. N. Mukerjee 20. Shri D. J.
Naik 21. Shri V. C. Parashar 22. Shri Ram Swarup 23. Shri C. L. Narasimha Reddy 24. Shrimati Yashoda
Reddy 25. Syed Nazir Hussain Samnani 26. Shri Ramshekhar Prasad Singh 27. Dr. L. M. Singhvi 28. Shri
U. M. Trivedi

29. Shri Balgovind Verma 30. Shri Asoke K. Sen.

Rajya Sabha

31. Syed Nausher Ali 32. Shri Santosh Kumar Basu 33. Shri K. S. Chavda 34. Shri D. B. Desai 35. Shri
Jagan Nath Kaushal 36. Shri Akbar Ali Khan 37. Shri R. S. Khandekar 38. Shri Lokanath Misra 39. Shri
M. A. Manickavelu 40. Shri P. N. Sapru 41. Kumari Shanta Vasisht 42. Shri Vijay Singh 43. Shri Hira
Vallabha Tripathi 44. Shri Bipin Behary Varma 45. Shri Gopikrishna Vijayvargiya.

DRAFTSMEN

1. Shri R. C. S. Sarkar, Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law. 2. Shri S. K. Maitra,
Deputy Draftsman, Ministry of Law.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A. L. Rai—Deputy Secretary.

Report of the Joint Committee

I, the Chairman of the Joint Committee to which the Bill* further to amend the Constitution of India
was referred, having been autho- rised to submit the report on their behalf, present this their
Report, with the Bill as amended by the Committee annexed thereto.

2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 21st January, 1963. The motion for reference of the
Bill to a Joint Committee of the Houses was moved in Lok Sabha by Shri Asoke K. Sen, the Minister of
Law, on the 22nd January, 1963 and was discussed and adopted on the same day (Appendix I).

3. Rajya Sabha discussed and concurred in the said motion on the 25th January, 1963 (Appendix II).

4. The message from Rajya Sabha was published in the Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, dated the 28th
January, 1963.

5. The Committee held four sittings in all.

6. The first sitting of the Committee was held on the 16th Feb- ruary, 1963 to draw up their
programme of work.

7. The Committee at their second sitting held on the 2nd March, 1963 decided to hear the views of
Members of Parliament, on the Bill, if they so desired. Members of Parliament were, accordingly,
informed by a paragraph in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Bulletins Part II, dated the 4th March,
1963 that Members who desired to place their views on the Bill before the Joint Committee might
inti- mate their names to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.

8. At their third sitting held on the 12th March, 1963, the Com- mittee heard the views of Shri
Bibhuti Mishra, M.P. who had desired to place his views on the Bill before the Committee.

9. The Committee considered the Bill clause-by-clause on the 12th March, 1963.

10. The Report of the Committee was to be presented by the first day of the fourth session. As this
could not be done, the Com- mittee requested for extension of time upto the 29th March, 1963 which
was granted by the House on the 18th February, 1963.

*Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the 21st January, 1963.

11. The Committee considered and adopted the Report on the 14th March, 1963.

12. The Committee have made only a formal change in the En- acting Formula. Except for this
amendment, the Committee do not consider any other amendment in the Bill to be necessary.

13. The Joint Committee recommend that the Bill as amended be passed.

NEW DELHI; The 14th March, 1963.

S. V. KRISHNAMOORTHY RAO, Chairman, Joint Committee.

MINUTES OF DISSENT

I

I regret I could not attend meetings of the Joint Committee owing to my illness.

I am against the Bill itself. It is a unique piece of intended legisla- tion. I am not aware of any
such provision in any Constitution of the world.

Though yielding to none in my desire to see India thoroughly integrated and consolidated I am of
opinion that the provisions of the Bill will not be helpful in the least. You cannot make a people
broad- minded in patriotic outlook by legislation. In my opinion every sub- stantial homogenous
group of people should be allowed to develop according to their own genius unhampered in any way by
anything that they consider an imposition from outside. It simply evokes opposi- tion directly,
indirectly or surreptitiously.

People get together from a sense of self interest and are alienated if they feel a grievance, which
may be real or even imaginary. In every case you have to sympathetically consider their grievance
and redress it in suitable ways. The best way, in my opinion, to integra- tion and consolidation is
removal of economic disparity and spread of scientific education free from superstition and myths.
In the case of backward people a time-limit should be fixed for bringing them on par with the
advanced section of the people. I believe the masses will respond quickly if we could give up our
social, economic and political vested interests. We have to win their confidence by fairness.

I am in favour of dropping the Bill altogether.

NEW DELHI; The 15th March, 1963.

SYED NAUSHERALI.

II

We have read the report of the Joint Committee on the Constitu- tion (Sixteenth Amendment) Bill,
1963 very carefully and are broadly in agreement with the proposed amendments to the Constitution.
We, how- ever, feel that it is not necessary to prescribe oath or affirmation for candidates at
elections to Parliament and State Legislatures. It would be more appropriate to amend the
Representation of the Peo- ple Act so as to make such speech or action a corrupt practice. In other
cases, the proposed amendments to the Constitution can be effective and will serve their intended
purpose only if this enactment is followed by suitable legislation to penalise violations or
breaches of the prescribed oath or affirmation.

New Delhi; The 16th March, 1963.

HARI VISHNU KAMATH R. S. KHANDEKAR

III

This Bill which seeks to put an end to the cry of secession in India is quite a laudable one though
it seriously interferes with the right of free speech guaranteed by the Constitution. The temptation
to amend the Constitution to meet the exigencies of every passing situation is a sacrilege on the
Constitution drafted by our elders after great thought and deliberation. Means other than amending
the Constitution should be sought to counteract the forces of disintegration as are envisaged today.
The Bill in the main seems to be directed against the secessionist activities in Madras which pose a
serious threat to the hegemony of the Congress in that Province. The proper way to meet this menace
is the electoral forum, where the hollowness of its reasoning should be convincingly exposed before
the masses. The D. M. K. is a peaceful organisation sworn to democratic methods. It has announced
that it would not raise the cry of Dravid- anad during the period of emergency. The Prime Minister
has an- nounced that the emergency may last even for 50 years. So for fifty years, this cry of
Dravidanad would not be pressed. The D. M. K. is co-operating with the war efforts. The present Bill
is not a proper gesture. It might drive the D. M. K. organisation underground and the remedy
proposed may be worse than the evil. This is my opinion, that the introduction of this Bill is
inopportune and may therefore be put off. Let it be clearly understood that I am against all forces
of disin- tegration, whether of secession or of the ex-territorial variety or of Hindi
Imperialism—all of which if unrestricted would spell disaster on our country.

New Delhi; The 16th March, 1963.

C. L. NARASIMHA REDDY.

Bill No. 1B of 1963

THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963

(AS REPORTED BY THE JOINT COMMITTEE)

(Word underlined indicates the amendment suggested by the Committee.)

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE IT ENACTED BY PARLIAMENT IN THE FOURTEENTH YEAR OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AS FOLLOWS:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963.

2. In article 19 of the Constitution,— (a) in clause (2), after the words "in the interests of", the
words "the sovereignty and integrity of India,", shall be inserted; (b) in clauses (3) and (4),
after the words "in the interests of", the words "the sovereignty and integrity of India or" shall
be inserted.

3. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:— "(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that
behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule;".

4. In article 173 of the Constitution, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—

"(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorized in that behalf by
the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;".

5. In the Third Schedule to the Constitution,—

(a) in Form I, after the words "Constitution of India as by law established", the words "that I will
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India," shall be inserted;

(b) for Form III, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

"III

A

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to Parliament:—

"I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Council of States (or the House
of the People) do __________ swear __ in the name of God __ that I will bear true __ solemnly affirm
__ faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold
the sovereignty and inte- grity of India."

B

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament:—

"I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Council of States (or the House of the
People) do __________ swear __ in the name of God __ that I will bear true __ solemnly affirm __
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am
about to enter.";

(c) in Forms IV, V and VIII, after the words "the Constitu- tion of India as by law established",
the words "that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India," shall be inserted;

(d) for Form VII, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

"VII

A

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the Legislature of a State:—

"I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly (or
Legislative Council), do __________ swear __ in the name of God __ that I will bear true __ solemnly
affirm __ faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will
uphold the sovereignty and inte- grity of India.".

B

Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature of a State:—

"I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative
Council), do __________ swear __ in the name of God __ that I will bear true __ solemnly affirm __
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am
about to enter.".

APPENDIX I

(Vide para 2 of the Report)

Motion in Lok Sabha for reference of the Bill to Joint Committee

"That the Bill further to amend the Constitution of India be referred to a Joint Committee of the
Houses consisting of 45 members; 30 from this House, namely:—

1. Shri Braj Raj Singh—Kotah 2. Shri S. N. Chaturvedi 3. Shri Homi F. Daji 4. Shri Ram Dhani Das 5.
Shri R. Dharmalingam 6. Shri Kashi Ram Gupta 7. Sardar Iqbal Singh 8. Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao
Jadhav 9. Shri Madeppa Bandappa Kadadi 10. Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath 11. Shri Paresh Nath Kayal 12.
Shri Nihar Ranjan Laskar 13. Shri Harekrushna Mahatab 14. Shri M. Malaichami 15. Shri Mathew
Maniyangadan 16. Shri Bibudhendra Misra 17. Shri F. H. Mohsin 18. Shri H. N. Mukerjee 19. Shri D. J.
Naik 20. Shri V. C. Parashar 21. Shri Ram Swarup 22. Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao 23. Shri C. L.
Narasimha Reddy 24. Shrimati Yashoda Reddy 25. Syed Nazir Hussain Samnani 26. Shri Ramshekhar Prasad
Singh 27. Dr. L. M. Singhvi 28. Shri U. M. Trivedi 29. Shri Balgovind Verma 30. Shri Asoke K. Sen.
and 15 from Rajya Sabha; that in order to constitute a sitting of the Joint Committee the quorum
shall be one-third of the total number of members of the Joint Committee; that the Committee shall
make a report to this House by the first day of the next session; that in other respects the Rules
of Procedure of this House rela- ting to Parliamentary Committees will apply with such variations
and modifications as the Speaker may make; and that this House recommends to Rajya Sabha that Rajya
Sabha do join the said Joint Committee and communicate to this House the names of 15 members to be
appointed by Rajya Sabha to the Joint Committee."

APPENDIX II

(Vide para 3 of the Report)

Motion in Rajya Sabha

"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that the Rajya Sabha do join in the
Joint Committee of the Houses on the Bill further to amend the Constitution of India, and resolves
that the following members of the Rajya Sabha be nomina- ted to serve on the said Joint Committee,
namely:—

1. Syed Nausher Ali 2. Shri Santosh Kumar Basu 3. Shri K. S. Chavda 4. Shri D. B. Desai 5. Shri
Jagan Nath Kaushal 6. Shri Akbar Ali Khan 7. Shri R. S. Khandekar 8. Shri Lokanath Misra 9. Shri M.
A. Manickavelu 10. Shri P. N. Sapru 11. Kumari Shanta Vasisht 12. Shri Vijay Singh 13. Shri Hira
Vallabha Tripathi 14. Shri Bipin Behary Varma 15. Shri Gopikrishna Vijayvargiya."

APPENDIX III MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTEENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963

I

First Sitting

The Committee met on Saturday, the 16th February, 1963 from 14:25 to 14:30 hours.

PRESENT

Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao—Chairman.

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

2. Shri Brij Raj Singh—Kotah 3. Shri S. N. Chaturvedi 4. Shri Homi F. Daji 5. Shri Kashi Ram Gupta
6. Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao Jadhav 7. Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath 8. Shri Harekrushna Mahatab 9. Shri M.
Malaichami 10. Shri Mathew Maniyangadan 11. Shri Bibudhendra Misra 12. Shri F. H. Mohsin 13. Shri H.
N. Mukerjee 14. Shri V. C. Parashar 15. Shri Ram Swarup 16. Shri C. L. Narasimha Reddy 17. Shrimati
Yashoda Reddy 18. Shri Ramshekhar Prasad Singh 19. Dr. L. M. Singhvi 20. Shri Balgovind Verma

Rajya Sabha

21. Shri Santosh Kumar Basu 22. Shri K. S. Chavda 23. Shri D. B. Desai 24. Shri J. N. Kaushal 25.
Shri Akbar Ali Khan 26. Shri M. A. Manickavelu 27. Shri P. N. Sapru 28. Kumari Shanta Vasisht 29.
Shri Vijay Singh 30. Shri Hira Vallabha Tripathi 31. Shri Bipin Behary Varma 32. Shri Gopikrishna
Vijayvargiya.

DRAFTSMEN

1. Shri R. C. S. Sarkar, Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law.

2. Shri S. K. Maitra, Deputy Draftsman, Ministry of Law.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A. L. Rai—Deputy Secretary.

2. The Committee decided to ask for extension of time for the presentation of their Report upto the
29th March, 1963 and autho- rised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri S. N. Chaturvedi to move
the necessary motion in the House.

3. The Committee decided to take up consideration of the Bill after the conclusion of their
consideration of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 1962.

The Committee then adjourned.

II

Second Sitting

The Committee met on Saturday, the 2nd March, 1963 from 17.25 to 17.35 hours.

PRESENT

Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao—Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

2. Shri S. N. Chaturvedi 3. Shri Ram Dhani Das 4. Shri Kashi Ram Gupta 5. Shri Nihar Ranjan Laskar
6. Shri Harekrushna Mahatab 7. Shri M. Malaichami 8. Shri Mathew Maniyangadan 9. Shri Bibudhendra
Misra 10. Shri H. N. Mukerjee 11. Shri V. C. Parashar 12. Shri C. L. Narasimha Reddy 13. Shri
Ramshekhar Prasad Singh 14. Shri U. M. Trivedi.

Rajya Sabha

15. Shri Santosh Kumar Basu 16. Shri R. S. Khandekar 17. Shri Lokanath Misra 18. Shri P. N. Sapru.

DRAFTSMEN

1. Shri R. C. S. Sarkar, Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law. 2. Shri S. K. Maitra,
Deputy Draftsman, Ministry of Law.

REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY

Shri B. S. Raghavan, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A. L. Rai—Deputy Secretary.

2. The Committee decided that Members of Parliament might be informed by a paragraph in the Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sabha Bulle- tins that they could, if they so desired, place their views on the Bill,
before the Committee at their next sitting.

3. The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Tuesday, the 12th March, 1963 at 16.00 hours.

III

Third Sitting

The Committee met on Tuesday, the 12th March, 1963 from 16.07 to 17.20 hours.

PRESENT

Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao—Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

2. Shri Homi F. Daji 3. Shri Ram Dhani Das 4. Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao Jadhav 5. Shri Madeppa
Bandappa Kadadi 6. Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath 7. Shri Bibudhendra Misra 8. Shri F. H. Mohsin 9. Shri V.
C. Parashar 10. Shri C. L. Narasimha Reddy 11. Shri Asoke K. Sen

Rajya Sabha

12. Shri Santosh Kumar Basu 13. Shri R. S. Khandekar 14. Shri Lokanath Misra 15. Shri M. A.
Manickavelu 16. Shri P. N. Sapru 17. Kumari Shanta Vasisht 18. Shri Vijay Singh 19. Shri Hira
Vallabha Tripathi.

DRAFTSMEN

1. Shri R. C. S. Sarkar, Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law.

2. Shri S. K. Maitra, Deputy Draftsman, Ministry of Law.

REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY

Shri B. S. Raghavan, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A. L. Rai—Deputy Secretary.

WITNESS

Shri Bibhuti Mishra, M.P.

2. The Committee heard the evidence given by Shri Bibhuti Mishra, M.P. He said that he was in favour
of the Bill but would like the provisions to be made more rigorous. He, however, felt that the
problem of preservation and maintenance of the integrity and sovereignty of the country would not be
solved by legislation alone. He stated that the root of the problem should be tackled and there
should be equitable representation of persons of different regions in the services and equilibrium
should be maintained in the economic development of all the parts of the country. Scholarships to
students should be given not on the basis of caste but on the basis of their economic conditions.

3. The Committee decided that it was not necessary to lay the verbatim record of the evidence given
before them on the Table of the House.

4. The Chairman informed the Committee that he had received a letter dated the 12th March, 1963,
from Shri R. Dharmalingam, a member of the Joint Committee, stating that he might be allowed to
refrain from taking further part in the proceedings of the Joint Committee as he was opposed to the
Bill. The Chairman also read out the letter to the Committee.

5. The Committee then took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill.

6. Clauses 1 to 5 and Title.—The clauses and the Title were adopted without amendment.

7. Enacting Formula.—The following amendment was accepted:— Page 1, line 1, for "Thirteenth"
substitute "Fourteenth". The Enacting Formula, as amended, was adopted.

8. The Committee decided to consider the draft Report at their next sitting.

9. The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Thursday, the 14th March, 1963 at 17.00 hours.

IV

Fourth Sitting

The Committee met on Thursday, the 14th March, 1963 from 17.04 to 17.10 hours.

PRESENT

Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao—Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

2. Shri Ram Dhani Das 3. Sardar Iqbal Singh 4. Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao Jadhav 5. Shri Madeppa
Bandappa Kadadi 6. Shri Hari Vishnu Kamath 7. Shri Bibudhendra Misra 8. Shri F. H. Mohsin 9. Syed
Nazir Hussain Samnani 10. Shri U. M. Trivedi 11. Shri Asoke K. Sen.

Rajya Sabha

12. Shri K. S. Chavda 13. Shri R. S. Khandekar 14. P. N. Sapru 15. Shri Hira Vallabha Tripathi 16.
Shri Gopikrishna Vijayvargiya.

DRAFTSMEN

1. Shri R. C. S. Sarkar, Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law.

2. Shri S. K. Maitra, Deputy Draftsman, Ministry of Law.

SECRETARIAT

Shri A. L. Rai—Deputy Secretary.

2. The Committee adopted the Bill, as amended.

3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Report.

4. The Chairman announced that the minutes of Dissent, if any, might be sent to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat so as to reach them by 17.00 hours on Saturday, the 16th March, 1963.

5. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri Madhavrao Laxmanrao Jadhav to
present the Report on their behalf.

6. The Committee also authorised Shri P. N. Sapru and, in his absence, Shri Gopikrishna Vijayvargiya
to lay the Report on the Table of Rajya Sabha.

7. The Chairman announced that the Report would be presented to Lok Sabha on the 18th March, 1963
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.

The Committee then adjourned.
