TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 107 of 2009

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH

AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment)

Act, 2009.

Short title and

commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification

in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In Part IV of the Constitution, after article 43A, the following article shall be

inserted, namely:—

“43B. The State shall endeavour to promote voluntary formation, autonomous

functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative

societies.”.

Insertion of

new article

43B.

Promotion of

co-operative

societies.

2

Insertion of

new Part IXB.

3. After Part IXA of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—

‘PART IXB

THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

Definitions.

243ZH. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “authorised person” means a person referred to as such in article

243ZQ;

(b) “board” means the board of directors or the governing body of a

co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction and control

of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to;

(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be

registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in

force in any State;

(d) “multi-State co-operative society” means a society with objects not

confined to one State and registered or deemed to be registered under any law

for the time being in force relating to such co-operatives;

(e) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson,

Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer of a co-operative society and includes

any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative society;

(f) "Registrar" means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central

Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the Registrar

for co-operative societies appointed by the State Government under the law

made by the Legislature of a State in relation to co-operative societies;

(g) "State Act" means any law made by the Legislature of a State;

(h) "State level co-operative society" means a co-operative society having

its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined as such in any

law made by the Legislature of a State.

Incorporation

of cooperative

societies.

243ZI. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by

law, make provisions with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of

co-operative societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic

member-control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning.

Number and

term of

members of

board and its

office bearers.

243ZJ. (1) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be provided

by the Legislature of a State, by law:

Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall

not exceed twenty-one:

Provided further that the Legislature of a State shall, by law, provide for the

reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two

seats for women on board of every co-operative society consisting of individuals as

members and having members from such class or category of persons.

(2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office bearers shall

be five years from the date of election and the term of office bearers shall be coterminous

with the term of the board:

Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by nomination

out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen, if

the term of office of the board is less than half of its original term.

(3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for co-option of

persons to be members of the board having experience in the field of banking,

3

management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to the objects and

activities undertaken by the co-operative soceity as members of the board of such

society:

Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in

addition to twenty-one directors specified in the proviso to clause (1):

Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to vote in

any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such member or to be

eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board:

Provided also that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall also be

the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of

counting the total number of directors specified in first proviso of clause (1) of this

article.

243ZK. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law made by the

Legislature of a State, the election of a board shall be conducted before the expiry of

the term of the board so as to ensure that the newly elected members of the board

assumes office immediately on the expiry of the term of the office of members of the

outgoing board.

Election of

members of

board.

(2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral

rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in such an

authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature of a State, by law:

Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the procedure

and guidelines for the conduct of such elections.

243ZL. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in

force, no board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a period exceeding

six months:

Provided that the board may be superseded or kept under suspension in case—

(i) of its persistent default; or

(ii) of negligence in the performance of its duties; or

(iii) the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of the cooperative society or its
members; or

(iv) there is a stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board; or

(v) the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of the State, by

law, under clause (2) of article 243ZK, has failed to conduct elections in accordance

with the provisions of the State Act:

Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not be

superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government shareholding or

loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government:

10 of 1949.

Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of

banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 shall also apply:

Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a multi-State

co-operative society, carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of this

clause shall have the effect as if for the words "six months", the words "one year" had

been substituted.

(2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to manage

the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of elections

within the period specified in clause (1) and handover the management to the elected

board.

Supersession

and

suspension of

board and

interim

management.

4

(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the conditions of

service of the administrator.

Audit of

accounts of cooperative

societies.

243ZM. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect

to the maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such

accounts at least once in each financial year.

(2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum qualifications

and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be eligible for auditing accounts

of the co-operative societies.

(3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor or auditing

firms referred to in clause (2) appointed by the general body of the co-operative

society:

Provided that such auditors or auditing firms shall be appointed from a panel

approved by a State Government or an authority authorised by the State Government

in this behalf.

(4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within six months

of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate.

(5) The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society, as may be

defined by the State Act, shall be laid before the State Legislature in the manner, as may

be provided by the State Legislature, by law.

Convening of

general body

meetings.

243ZN. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions that the annual

general body meeting of every co-operative society shall be convened within a period

of six months of close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided

in such law.

Right of a

member to get

information.

243ZO. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for access to every

member of a co-operative society to the books, information and accounts of the

co-operative society kept in regular transaction of its business with such member.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure the

participation of members in the management of the co-operative society providing

minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and utilising the minimum

level of services as may be provided in such law.

(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative education

and training for its members.

Returns.

243ZP. Every co-operative society shall file returns, within six months of the

close of every financial year, to the authority designated by the State Government

including the following, namely:—

(a) annual report of its activities;

(b) its audited statement of accounts;

(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the

co-operative society;

(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if any;

(e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and

conduct of elections when due; and

(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of any of

the provisions of the State Act.

Offences and

penalties.

243ZQ. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the

offences relating to the co-operative societies and penalties for such offences.

5

(2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall include the

commission of the following act or omission as offences, namely:—

(a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully makes a

false return or furnishes false information, or any person wilfully not furnishes

any information required from him by a person authorised in this behalf under

the provisions of the State Act;

(b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys any

summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the provisions of the

State Act;

(c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a cooperative society amount
deducted by him from its employee within a period of

fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made;

(d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over custody of

books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property

belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or custodian, to an

authorised person; and

(e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the board or

office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice.

243ZR. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the multi-State co-operative

societies subject to the modification that any reference to "Legislature of a State",

"State Act" or "State Government" shall be construed as a reference to "Parliament",

"Central Act" or "the Central Government" respectively.

Application to

multi-State

co-operative

societies.

243ZS. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall,

in their application to a Union territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the

references to the Legislature of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof

appointed under article 239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative

Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:

Application to

Union

territories.

Provided that the President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct

that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or part thereof as

he may specify in the notification.

243ZT. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating

to co-operative societies in force in a State immediately before the commencement of

the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Act, 2009, which is

inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended

or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the

expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.’.

Continuance of

existing laws.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The co-operative sector, over the years, has made significant contribution to various

sectors of national economy and has achieved voluminous growth. However, it has shown

weaknesses in safeguarding the interests of the members and fulfilment of objects for which

these institutions were organised. There have been instances where elections have been

postponed indefinitely and nominated office bearers or administrators remaining in-charge

of these institutions for a long time. This reduces the accountability of the management of

co-operative societies to their members. Inadequate professionalism in management in many

of the co-operative institutions has led to poor services and low productivity. Co-operatives

need to run on well established democratic principles and elections held on time and in a free

and fair manner. Therefore, there is a need to initiate fundamental reforms to revitalize these

institutions in order to ensure their contribution in the economic development of the country

and to serve the interests of members and public at large and also to ensure their autonomy,

democratic functioning and professional management.

2. The "co-operative societies" is a subject enumerated in Entry 32 of the State List of

the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and the State Legislatures have accordingly enacted

legislations on co-operative societies. Within the framework of State Acts, growth of

co-operatives on large scale was envisaged as part of the efforts for securing social and

economic justice and equitable distribution of the fruits of development. It has, however,

been experienced that in spite of considerable expansion of co-operatives, their performance

in qualitative terms has not been up to the desired level. Considering the need for reforms in

the Co-operative Societies Acts of the States, consultations with the State Governments

have been held at several occasions and in the conferences of State Co-operative Ministers.

A strong need has been felt for amending the Constitution so as to keep the co-operatives

free from unnecessary outside interferences and also to ensure their autonomous

organisational set up and their democratic functioning.

3. The Central Government is committed to ensure that the co-operative societies in

the country function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically sound

manner. With a view to bring the necessary reforms, it is proposed to incorporate a new Part

in the Constitution so as to provide for certain provisions covering the vital aspects of

working of co-operative societies like democratic, autonomous and professional functioning.

A new article is also proposed to be inserted in Part IV of the Constitution (Directive Principles

of State Policy) for the States to endeavour to promote voluntary formation, autonomous

functioning, democratic control and professional management of cooperative societies. The

proposed new Part in the Constitution, inter alia, seeks to empower the Parliament in respect

of multi-State co-operative societies and the State Legislatures in case of other co-operative

societies to make appropriate law, laying down the following matters, namely:—

(a) provisions for incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative

societies based on the principles of democratic member-control, member-economic

participation and autonomous functioning;

(b) specifying the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society to be

not exceeding twenty-one members;

(c) providing for a fixed term of five years from the date of election in respect of

the elected members of the board and its office bearers;

(d) providing for a maximum time limit of six months during which a board of

directors of co-operative society could be kept under supersession or suspension;

(e) providing for independent professional audit;

(f) providing for right of information to the members of the co-operative societies;

6

7

(g) empowering the State Governments to obtain periodic reports of activities

and accounts of co-operative societies;

(h) providing for the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the

Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on the board of every co-operative society,

which have individuals as members from such categories;

(i) providing for offences relating to co-operative societies and penalties in

respect of such offences.

4. It is expected that these provisions will not only ensure the autonomous and

democratic functioning of co-operatives, but also ensure the accountability of management

to the members and other stakeholders and shall provide for deterrence for violation of the

provisions of the law.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

NEW DELHI;

The 11th November, 2009.

SHARAD PAWAR

LOK SABHA

————

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

————

(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs and

Public Distribution System)

GMGIPMRND—4711LS(S5)—24-11-2009.