SEC. i ]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

421

BTUL N O . 54 OF 1975

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-sixth Year of] the Republic
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Short
title.
Act, 1975.
2. In article 123 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following Amendclause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed alwayg to have been inserted, ment of
article
namely: —
123.

"(4) 'Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground.".
3. In article 213 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following Amendclause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, ment of
namely: —
article
213.

"(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the administrator mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground.".
4. In article 239B of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following Amendclause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, ment of
namely: —
article
23»B.

"(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the administrator mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground.".

422
Amendment of
article
302.

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

5. In article 352 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following
clause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted,
namely: —
"(4) The power conferred on the President by this article shall
(include the power to issue different Proclamation on different
grounds, being war or external aggression or internal disturbance
or imminent danger of war or external aggression or internal disturbance, whether or not there is a Proclamation already issued by
the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in operation(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1)
and clause (3) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any ground;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (2), neither the
Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any question, on any ground, regarding the validity of—
(i) a declaration made by Proclamation by the President
to the effect stated in clause (1); or
(ii) the continued operation of such Proclamation."

Amendment of
article
300.

6. In article 356 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following
clause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted,
namely: —
"(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any Court on any jfround.".

Amendment of
article
399,

7. In article 359 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following
clause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted,
namely: —
"(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of
the rights conferred by Part III is in operation, nothing in that Part
conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as
denned in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive
action which the State would but for the provisions contained in that
Part be competent to make1 or to take, but any law so made shall, to
the extent of the incompetency, Cease to have effect as. soon as the
order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect.".

Amendment of
article
360,

8. In article 3&0 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following
clause shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always4 to have been inserted,
namely: —
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1)
shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any
court on any ground;

SEC. 2]

1 HF. OAZETTF OF INDTA EXTRAORDINARY

423

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (2), neither the
Supreme Court nor any other cuort shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any question, on any ground, regarding the validity
of—
(i) a declaration made by Proclamation by the President
to the effect stated in clause (1); or
(ii) the continued operation of such Proclamation.".

424

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PABT I I -

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Bill, 1975 seeks to amend
articles 123, 213, 239B, 352, 356, 359 and 360 of the Constitution.
2. Article 123 empowers the President to promulgate Ordinances when
both the Houses of Parliament are not in session if he is satisfied that
circumstances exist rendering it necessary to take immediate action
Corresponding powers have been conferred by the Constitution on the
Governor under article 213. Similar powers have been conferred on the
Administrator under article 239B when the Legislature of a Undon territory is not in session. On the plain language of articles 123, 213 and 239B
there is no doubt that the satisfaction mentioned in those, articles is
subjective satisfaction and that it is not justiciable. There is no doubt
that this was also the intention of the makers of the Constitution. However, litigation is pending involving the justiiciability of this issue and
contentions are being raised that the issue is subject to judicial scrutiny.
To place the matter beyond doubt, it is proposed to provide dn the Constitution that the satisfaction of the President, Governor or Administrator
shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on
any ground.
3. Article 352 empowers the President to declare Emergency if he is
satisfied that the security of India or any part of it is threatened by war,
external aggression or internal disturbance. Article 356 empowers the
President to assume to himself the functions of the Government of a
State if the constitutional machinery in any State fails and the Government in tho State cannot be carried on. Likewise article 360 empowers
the President to declare Financial Emergency if he is satisfied that the
financial stability of India is threatened. Here again, the issue regarding
satisfaction is, on the face of the article clearly n °t justiciable. However, as the validity of the Proclamation issued under article 352 has been
challenged in several proceedings and as litigation of this nature involves
waste of public time and money, it is proposed to amend these three
articles so as to make the satisfaction of the President final and conclusive
and not justiciable on any ground.
4. In relation to article 352, contentions have been raised in certain writ
petitions that while the orginal Proclamation of Emergency ]» in operation no further Proclamation of Emergency could be made thereunder.
In order to place the matter beyond doubt it is proposed to make it clear
in article 352 that the President may issue different Proclamations on
different grounds whether or not there is a Proclamation already in existence and in operation.
5. When a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President
is empowered under article 359 of the Constitution to make an order
suspending the right to move any court for the enforcement of such of
the rights conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in that order. It

SEC. 21

THH GAZEITE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

425

was intended that the powers conferred by this article should be exercised during an emergency according to needs of the situation. On, the
other hand, article 358 renders the provisions of article 19 automatically
inoperative while the Proclamation of Emergency' is in operation, and the
power to make any law or to take any executive action is not restricted
by the provisions of that article. The intention underlying article 359
appears to bv that wh^n an order is made under clause (1) of that article
in relation to any of the rights conferred by Part III and mentioned in
the order, the order so made would have for all practical purppses the
same effect in relation to those rights as article 358 has dn relation to
article 19. It is, therefoie, proposed not to have any differences in
language between article 358 and the language in respect of those rights
-only which may be mentioned in the Presidential Order under clause (1)
of article 359.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aioresaid objects.

NFW DELHI,

The 20-Th. July, MTO.

H. R. GOKHALE.

