REGISTERED NO. D. 221

The Gazette of India
EXTRAORDINARY
PART II—Section 2

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 41]

NEW DELHI, MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 1971/SRAVANA 18, 1893

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed
as a separate compilation.

The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on the 9th August,
1971:—
Bill No. 112 OF 1971

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment)
Act, 1971.

Short title.

Omission of
articles 291
and 362.
3. After article 363 of the Constitution, the following article shall be Insertion of
new article
inserted, namely: —
363A.
"363A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution or in any Recognition
granted to
law for the time being in force—
Rulers of
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before Indian
States to
the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amend- cease and
purses
ment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of privy
to be aboan Indian State or any person who, at any time before such com- lished.

2. Articles 291 and 362 of the Constitution shall be omitted.

mencement, was recognised by the President as the successor of
such Ruler shall, on and from such commencement, cease to be
recognised as such Ruler or the successor of such Ruler;
(567)


568

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PAHT II—

(b) on and from the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, privy purse is abolished
and all rights, liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse
are extinguished and accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be,
the successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (a), or any other
person shall not be paid any sum as privy purse.".
Amendment Oi'
n .-tide
306.

4. In article 366 of the Constitution, for clause (22), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely: —
' (22) "Ruler" means the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any
time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler
of an Indian State or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was recognised by the President as the successor of such
Kuler;*.


SEC. 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

569

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The concept of rulership, with privy purses and special privileges unrelated to any current functions and social purposes, is incompatible with
an egalitarian social order. Government have, therefore, decided to terminate the privy purses and privileges of the Rulers of former Indian States.
It is necessary for the purpose, apart from amending the relevant provisions of the Constitution, to insert a new article therein so as to terminate
expressly the recognition already granted to such Rulers and to abolish
privy purses and extinguish all rights, liabilities and obligations in respect
of privy purses. Hence this Bill.

NEW DELHI;

The 31st July, 1971.

INDIRA GANDHI,

