The following Bills were introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 1999:—

I

BILL No. XLVI of 1999

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1999. 2. In article 243M of
the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes, shall
apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.” THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 was brought into force with effect from the
24th April, 1993. The said Act provided that within one year from the date of commencement of that
Act, all the States shall amend their local laws to bring them in conformity with the new provisions
under the Constitution. This exercise was required to be completed before the 23rd April, 1994.

2. Article 243D provides for reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every
Panchayat. Arunachal Pradesh is a State inhabited fully by indigenous tribal people. No Scheduled
Castes exist in the State. No reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes has been made in the
State Legislative Assembly and no provisions exist under any law to that effect. There is also no
reservation for the Scheduled Castes in State Government services.

3. The Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873 and the Chin Hills Regulation, 1896 provide special
protection and safeguard for the peaceful existence of the indigenous tribal people of Arunachal
Pradesh. These laws prohibit the entry of outsiders in the tribal area without "Inner Line Permit".
Only the indigenous tribal people are allowed to participate in the democratic processes.

4. The tribal society in Arunachal Pradesh is casteless, where social equality among men and women
has prevailed over centuries and ages. Since no Scheduled Castes exist in the State and the State of
Arunachal Pradesh is singularly free from the caste system, it is proposed to insert a new clause
(3A) in article 243M of the Constitution of India, to exempt the State of Arunachal Pradesh from the
application of article 243D relating to the reservation of seats in Panchayats for the Scheduled
Castes.

5. This will provide a legal and constitutional basis for Panchayat Raj Institutions in Arunachal
Pradesh in accordance with the socio-political ethos of the State.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.

SUNDER LAL PATWA.