4i6

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

BILL NO. 52 OF

[PART II—

1974

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.

Short
title.
Amendment of
article
101.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment)
Act, 1974.
2. In article 101 of the Constitution, in clause (3) ,—
(1) for sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be substituted!, namely: —
"(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed
to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his
resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the
case may be,";
(2) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: —
"Provided "that in the case of any resignation referred to in
sub-clause (b), if from information received or otherwise and
after making such Inquiry as he thinks fit, the Chairman or the
Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is
not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.71.

Amendment of
article
190.

3. In article 190 of the Constitution, in clause (3),—
(1) for sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be substituted!, namely:—
"(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed
to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and his


SEC 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

417

resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the
case may be,";
(2) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: —
"Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in
sub-clause (b), if from information received or otherwise and
after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker or the
Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation Is
not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.".


41%

1HE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

-- {-PART II—SEC. 2]

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Articles 101 (3) (b) a n d 190 (3)(b) of t h e C o n s t i t u t i o n p e r m i t a m e m b e r

of either House of Parliament or a member of a House of the Legislature
of a State to resign his seat by writing under his hand addressed
to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be. In the recent past,
there have been instances where coercive measures have been resorted
to for compelling members of a Legislative Assembly to resign their
membership. If this is not checked, it might become difficult for Legislatures to function in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
It is therefore proposed to amend the above two articles to impose a
requirement as to acceptance of the resignation by the Speaker or the
Chairman and to provide that the resignation shall not be accepted by
the Speaker or the Chairman if he is satisfied after making such inquiry
as he thinks fit that the resignation is not voluntary or genuine.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
NEW DELHI;

H. R. GOKHALE.

The 2nd May, 1974.

S. L. SHAKDHER,
Secretary-General.

PRINTED BY THE MANAGKR, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO HOAD, NEW
BEIHT AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 1 9 7 4

