A s INTBODVCED IM LOK SABHA OK

B ill y g 12> of 198S
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-SECOND AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1968
A

BILL

further to amend the O otutituticn of India.

^

, j

Bb it enacted by Parliam ent in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Rep »Wic
of India as follows:—

5

1.
H iis Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-second Amendment)
Act. 1988.

Short

2. In article 326 of the Constitutioii, for the words “tweiity-wie years”,
the words “eighteen years’* shall he substituted.

^ ,
article
S26.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 326 of the Constitution provides th at the elections to the
House ol the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State
shaii ce on the basis of adult suffrage, th at is to say, a person sliould not
be less than 21 years ol age. I t has been found th a t m any of the
countries have specified 18 years as th e voting age. In our country s o m e
of th e S tate G overnm ents have adopted 18 years of age for elections to
th e local authorities. The present-day youth are literate and enlighten­
ed and th e low ering of th e voting age would provide to the u n rep re­
sented youth of th e country an * opportunity to give vent to th eir
feelings and help them become a p a rt of the political process. The
preso it-d ay youth are very much politically conscious. It is, therefore,
proposed to reduce th e voting age from 21 years to 18 years.
2 The Bill seeks to adiieve the above object.

N ew D e lh i;

The 9th December, 1988.

B. SHANKAR AN AND


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 326 of the Constitution to
reduce the voting age from 21 years to 18 year*. It is estimated that as
a result of this reduction in voting age, the num ber of voters will be in­
creased by 47 million. If the Bill is enacted and brought into operation,
the electoral rolls have to be revised to include all those persons who
are between the age of 18 and 21 years. It is not possible to precisely
estim ate the expenditure involved in the revision of electoral rolls, On
a modest estim ate given by the Selection Commission, it is estim ated that
this would come to ansrwhere betw een rupees 1 drore and 1.50 cr<wes.
Some more expenditure is also likely to be involved in the conduct of
elections, in the form of printing of additional baUot papefs. the tftab lishm ent of more num ber of polling stations, etc. It is not possible to
precisely estim ate the expenditure th a t would be incurred on this
accoimt.
The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve
any other expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring.


ANNBXURE
E x tra c t

Bcctkms
lo the
^ u s e of
the Peo.
pie and
to the
Legialati\'e
Afltemblies of
Statee to
be OB the
basic ot

sOBnt^.

f r o m t h * C o n s t t t u t i o n o r In » ia

sa t. l l i e d e c tio is to the House of the People and to th e Legislative
Assembly of every S tate shall be on the basis of ad u lt su£Erage, th a t
is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than
tw enty-one 3rears of age cm su d i date as m ay be fixed in th a t behalf by
or under any law m ade by the appropriate Legislature and is not
otherw ise d i^u alified under this Constitution or any law made
by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of m ind, cxime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled
to be registered as a voter at any such election.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
fu rth er to am end the C m utitution of India.

(Shri B. Shaakaranand, Minigter of Laiv and Justice)

