W

T TUER( )04 /0007/2003—05 REGISTERED NO, DLINJOY/0007/ 200305

= m

I

The Gazette of Mia

EXTRAORDINARY

-1

PART

Il — Section 1

sfiree

& vt

®1]

PUBLISHED

BY AUTHORITY

i feel, ypwem, v

2, 2004 9 12, 1925

NEW DELH], FRIDAY, JANU

2, ARY

2004/ PAUSA 12, 192§

No.1)

wmﬂﬁlwdﬂ#mﬂﬁﬁﬁﬁmmtwimmwl

Sepacate paging is given to this Part io order that it may be filed a5 a stparate compilation.

' MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE

’

(Legislative Department)

New

Delhi, dﬂe_d the 2nd January, 2004/Pawsa 12, 1925 (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the

It January, 2004 and is hereby published for general information:—~

THE CONSTITUTION (NINETY-FIRST AMENDMENT)

ACT, 2003

o

.

_[1stJaruary, 2004.]

-

An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bk it enacted

by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

-

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003,

2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clauses shallbe

inserted, namely:—

“(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the

Council of Ministers shall not exceed fiftcen per cent. of the total number of

members of the House of the People.

(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political

party wheo is disqualified for being 8 member of that House under paragraph 2

«of the Tenth Schedule shall alsobe disqualified to be appointed as a Minister

under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his

disquatification till the date on which the term of his office as such member would

Short tile.

Amendment

ofarticle 75.

‘THE GAZETTEOF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

2

[ParT 11—

expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament before the

expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is

cartier.”,

Amendment of

article 164,

3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clauses shall be

inserted, namely:—

“(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in the

Ministors in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cc.-.. of the total

of cil

Coun

number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State:

Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, ina

State shall not be less than twelve:

Provided farther that where the tolal number of Ministers, including the

Chief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement

of the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen

per cent. or the number specified in the first proviso, as the case may be, then,

the total number of Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with

the provisions of this clause within six moaths from such date as the President

.

may by public notification appoint.

(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of

political

the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council ‘beionging to any

party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2

of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as & Minister

his

under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of

member

such

as

officc

his

of

term

disqualificstion till the date on which the

of

would expire or where he contests any election to the Legislative Assembly

a State or ither House of the Legislature of a Stato having Legislative Council,

is

as the case may be, before the expiry of such period, tift the date on which he

declared clected, whichever is earlier.”.

Insertion

new

of

article

Disqualificstion for

4. After article 361A of the Constitution, the following articte shall be inserted,

pnamely:—

+361B. A member of a House belonging to any political party who is

disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth

Schodule shait alsobe disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for

sppoiniment

tvapolibenl

duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqalification till the

post.

dste on which the

term of his office as such member would expire or till the

date on which he contests an clection to a House and s declared elected,

whichever is earlier.

°

Explanation.—For the purposes of this article,—

(a) the expression “House” has the meaning assigned to it in clause

(a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule;

(b) the expression “remunerative political post” means any office—

(/) under the Governmentof India or the Government of a State

where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid out of the

public fevenue of the Government of India or the Government of the

State, as the case may be; or

which is wholly

ated

or not,

r whether incorpor

a body,

* (if) unde

by dthe Government of India or the Governmentof

or partially owne

asuua_ndmelduynrnmmmfnrmchoﬁﬁee is paidby such

body,

except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.’.

Sec. 1]

THE GAZETTEOF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

3

5. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution,—

Amendment

(a) in paragraph [, in clause (5), the words and figure “paragraph 3 or, asthe

case may be,"” shall be omitted;

;nln..ls.

f the Tenth

(5)in paragraph2, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words and figures “paragraphs

3,4 and 5", the words and figures “paragraphs 4 and 5" shall be substituted;

(¢) paragraph 3 shall be omitted.

T.K. VISWANATHAN,

- Secy. to the Govt. of India.

"PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI

AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUELICATIONS, DELH, 2004.

MGIPMRAND--4519G3—03-01-2004.