Sice. 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

445

BILL NO. 56 OF 1972

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Thirty-second Amend- Short
ment) Act, 1972.
title.
•1. W 1 * N l n t h S c h e d u l e t 0 t h e Constitution, after entry 64 and before Amendthe Explanation, the following entries shall be inserted, namely: —
ment of

A c t ' s T o M ^ r 3 1 3 Land R e f ° r m S (Amendment) Act> im (Kerala
Act 2^ofl97?)e»ala L a n d R e f ° r m S ( A m e n d m e n t ) Act - 1971 (Kerala

Ninth
Schedule.


Ttit GAZETTE O*1 iNblA EX^UAOllDlNARV

,446

[t>AW tl—

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (Act 1 of 1964), is the principal
land reform law in the State of Kerala and was included in the Ninth
Schedule to the Constitution. In the course of implementation, the State
Government faced serious practical difficulties and to overcome them,
that Act was extensively amended by the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Act 35 of 1969) and by the Kerala Land Reforms
(Amendment) Act, 1971 (Act 25 of 1971). Certain crucial provisions
of the principal Act as amended were challenged in the High Court of
Kerala and in the Supreme Court, creating a climate of uncertainty in the
effective implementation of land reforms. Although the High Court of
Kerala has generally upheld the scheme of land reforms envisaged in
the principal Act as amended, a few vital provisions have been struck
down by the High Court. Even in regard to the provisions upheld by
the High Court, the affected parties had moved the Supreme Court in
appeal. Some persons also moved the Supreme Court in original petitions
challenging certain provisions of the Act. The Supreme Court in its judgments delivered on 26th and 28th April, 1972, have generally upheld the
scheme of land reforms as envisaged in the principal Act as amended but
agreed with the High Court invalidating certain crucial provisions. It is
feared that this will have far-reaching adverse effects on the implementation of the programme of land reforms in the State and thousands of
tenants will be adversely affected by some of the provisions which have
been either struck down or rendered ineffective. It is also apprehended
that certain observations of the Supreme Court in the judgments might
open the floodgates of litigation much to the detriment of thousand of
Kudikidappukars in the State who will not be able to defend themselves
in protracted legal proceedings. Further, appeals have been preferred
against the judgement of the Kerala High Court invalidating certain important provisions of the principal Act as amended [e.g. sections 4A(1) (a)
and (b), 7, 7B(1) and 106] and are pending in the Supreme Court.
2. It is, therefore, proposed to include the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 and the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act,
1971 in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution so that they may have the
protection under article 3 IB and any uncertainty or doubt that may arise
in regard to the validity of those Acfls is removed. The Bill seeks to
abhieve this object.
NEW DELHI;

The 24th May, 1972.

H.R. GOKHALE.

