1

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 371 of 2019

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH

AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-sixth

Amendment) Act, 2019.

Short title and

commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on the 25th day of January, 2020.

5

2. In article 334 of the Constitution,—

(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be

substituted, namely:—

“Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after certain

period”;

10

(b) in the long line, after clauses (a) and (b), for the words "seventy years",

the words "eighty years in respect of clause (a) and seventy years in respect of

clause (b)" shall be substituted.

Amendment

of article 334.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of the Constitution

relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes

and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of

the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States shall cease to have effect on the

expiration of the period of 70 years from the commencement of the Constitution. In other

words, these provisions will cease to have effect on the 25th January, 2020, if not

extended further.

2. Although the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have made considerable

progress in the last 70 years, the reasons which weighed with the Constituent Assembly

in making provisions with regard to the aforesaid reservation of seats have not yet

ceased to exist. Therefore, with a view to retaining the inclusive character as envisioned

by the founding fathers of the Constitution, it is proposed to continue the reservation

of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for another ten years

i.e. up to 25th January, 2030.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

NEW DELHI;

The 4th December, 2019.

RAVI SHANKAR PRASAD.

2

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE C ONSTITUTION OF INDIA

*

*

*

*

*

334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the

provisions of this Constitution relating to—

(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled

Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States;

and

(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the

People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination,

shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of seventy years from the

commencement of this Constitution:

Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House

of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the then

existing House or Assembly, as the case may be.

*

*

*

3

*

*

Reservation of

seats and

special

representation

to cease after

seventy years.

LOK SABHA

————

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

————

(Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Minister of Law and Justice, Communications and

Electronics and Information, Technology)

MGIPMRND—4121LS(S3)—05-12-2019.