AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON [?]

Bill No. 159 of 1991. THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2. After Part IX of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—

PART IXA

THE MUNICIPALITIES

243P. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under article 243S;

(b) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of a Municipality;

(c) “Municipality” means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government constituted
under article 243Q;

(d) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published. 243Q. (1) There shall be constituted in every State— (a) a
Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in
transition from a rural area to an urban area; (b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a larger urban area” means
such area as the Government of a State may, having regard to the population of the area, the density
of the population therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of
employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as it may
deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.

243R. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect to the composition of Municipalities.

(2) Save as provided in clauses (3) and (4), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by
persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for this
purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards.

(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the representation, in a Municipality, of
the Chairpersons of Committees constituted at the ward or other level or levels under article 243S
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such law.

(4) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the representation in a Municipality of
persons having special knowledge or experience of Municipal administration in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be specified in such law: Provided that such persons shall not
have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality.

(5) The Chairperson of a Municipality shall be chosen by election in such manner as the Legislature
of a State may, by law, provide.

243S. The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the constitution of Committees at the ward
level or other level or levels within the territorial area of a Municipality and such law may
contain provisions with respect to— (a) the composition and the territorial area of such Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled; (c) the powers and functions
of the Municipality which may be delegated to such Committees; (d) the manner in which the
Chairpersons of such Committees shall be elected.

243T. The provisions of articles 243D [except the provisos to clause (4)], 243E , 243F, 243H, 243-I,
243K, 243L, 243N and 243-O shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to Municipalities as they
apply in relation to Panchayats.

243U. (1) The accounts of the Municipal Corporations constituted under article 243Q shall be kept in
such form as the Governor may, on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India,
prescribe.

(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall cause the accounts of the said Municipal
Corporations to be audited in such manner as he may deem fit and the reports of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General shall be submitted to the Governor of the State, who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislature of the State and before the Municipal Corporation concerned.

243V. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow—

(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function
as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers
and responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein,
with respect to—

(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;

(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them
including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;

(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out
the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule.

243W. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the
tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of
this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368. 3. After the Eleventh Schedule,
the following Schedule shall be added, namely:-

"TWELFTH SCHEDULE (Article 243V)

1. Urban planning including town planning. 2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
3. Planning for economic and social development. 4. Roads and bridges. 5. Water supply for domestic,
industrial and commercial purposes. 6. Public health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste
management. 7. Fire services. 8. Urban forestry and promotion of ecological aspects. 9. Safeguarding
the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded. 10.
Slum improvement and upgradation. 11. Urban poverty alleviation. 12. Provision of urban amenities
and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds. 13. Promotion of cultural, educational and
aesthetic aspects. 14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds. 15. Cattle
pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. 16. Vital statistics including registration of births and
deaths." STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In many States local bodies have become weak and ineffective on account of a variety of reasons,
including the failure to hold regular elections, prolonged supersessions and inadequate devolution
of powers and functions. As a result, Urban Local Bodies are not able to perform effectively as
vibrant democratic units of self-government.

2. Having regard to these inadequacies, it is considered necessary that provisions relating to Urban
Local Bodies are incorporated in the Constitution particularly for—

(i) putting on a firmer footing the relationship between the State Government and the Urban Local
Bodies with respect to— (a) the functions and taxation powers; and (b) arrangements for revenue
sharing; (ii) ensuring regular conduct of elections; (iii) ensuring timely elections in the case of
supersession; and (iv) providing adequate representation for the weaker sections like Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women.

3. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new Part relating to the Urban Local Bodies in the
Constitution to provide for— (a) constitution of three types of Municipalities: (i) Nagar Panchayats
for areas in transition from a rural area to urban area; (ii) Municipal Councils for smaller urban
areas; (iii) Municipal Corporations for larger urban areas.

The broad criteria for specifying the said areas is being provided in the proposed article 243O;

(b) composition of Municipalities, which will be decided by the Legislature of a State, having the
following features :

(i) persons to be chosen by direct election;

(ii) representation of Chairpersons of Committees, if any, at ward or other levels in the
Municipalities;

(iii) representation of persons having special knowledge or experience of Municipal Administration
in Municipalities (without voting rights);

(c) election of Chairpersons of a Municipality in the manner specified in the State law;

(d) constitution of Committees at ward level or other level or levels within the territorial area of
a Municipality as may be provided in the State law; (e) reservation of seats in every Municipality—
(i) for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population of which not less
than one-third shall be for women; (ii) for women which shall be not less than one-third of the
total number of seats; (iii) in favour of backward class of citizens if so provided by the
Legislature of the State; (iv) for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women in the office of
Chairpersons as may be specified in the State law; (f) fixed tenure of 5 years for the Municipality
and re-election within six months of end of tenure. If a Municipality is dissolved before expiration
of its duration, elections to be held within a period of six months of its dissolution; (g)
devolution by the State Legislature of powers and responsibilities upon the Municipalities with
respect to preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, and for the
implementation of development schemes as may be required to enable them to function as institutions
of self-government; (h) levy of taxes and duties by Municipalities, assigning of such taxes and
duties to Municipalities by State Governments and for making grants-in-aid by the State to the
Municipalities as may be provided in the State law; (i) a Finance Commission to review the finances
of the Municipalities and to recommend principles for— (1) determining the taxes which may be
assigned to the Municipalities; (2) sharing of taxes between the State and Municipalities; (3)
grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; (j) audit of accounts
of the Municipal Corporations by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and laying of reports
before the Legislature of the State and the Municipal Corporation concerned; (k) making of law by a
State Legislature with respect to elections to the Municipalities to be conducted under the
superintendence, direction and control of the chief electoral officer of the State; (l) application
of the provisions of the Bill to any Union territory or part thereof with such modifications as may
be specified by the President; (m) exempting Scheduled areas referred to in clause (1), and tribal
areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244, from the application of the provisions of the Bill.
Extension of provisions of the Bill to such areas may be done by Parliament by law; (n)
disqualifications for membership of a Municipality; (o) bar of jurisdiction of Courts in matters
relating to elections to the Municipalities.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

SHEILA KAUL.

NEW DELHI: The 11th September, 1991. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Part IXA, in the Constitution consisting of articles 243P
to 243W.

2. Article 243V read with article 243T of the Bill envisages that the Legislature of a State may
confer such powers and authority (including the power to levy, collect and appropriate taxes,
duties, tolls and fees) on the Municipalities as may be required to enable them to function as
institutions of self-government. The strengthening of Municipalities as envisaged may call for the
strengthening of the administrative capabilities of these Municipalities in the States. Article 243U
of the Bill envisages that the accounts of the Municipal Corporations shall be kept in such form as
may be prescribed by the Governor on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and
shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. As article 243T of the Bill makes
its provisions applicable to the Union territories, the expenditure which may have to be incurred in
relation to the Union territories, will have to be met by the Government of India out of its
Consolidated Fund. Some expenditure may have to be incurred on strengthening the office of
Comptroller and Auditor-General to enable him to discharge the responsibility of audit of the
Municipal Corporations. It is, however, difficult to estimate the annual recurring expenditure a[?]
this stage.

3. The Bill, when enacted, will not involve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure. LOK
SABHA

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shrimati Sheila Kaul, Minister of Urban Development)