REGISTERED NO.D.221

The Gazette of India
EXTRAORDINARY
PART II—Section 2

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 35]

NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JULY 28, 1971/SRAVANA 6, 1893

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that It may he filed
as a separate compilation.

LOK SABHA
The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on the 28th July,
1971:—
Bill No. 105 of 1971.
A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament
Republic of India as follows: —

in

the Twenty-second Year of the

1. This Act may bo called the Constitution (Twenty-fourth
ment) Act, 1971.

Amend- Short title.

2. In article 13 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely: —
" (4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of
this Constitution made under article 368.".
3. Article 368 of the Constitution shall be re-numbered as clause (2)
thereof, and—
(a) for the marginal heading to that article, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely: —
"Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor. ";
(b) before clause (2) as so re-numbered, the following clause
shall be inserted, namely: —
"(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by
way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this
(489)

Amendment
of article 13.

Amendment
of article
368.

490

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this
article.";
(c) in clause (2) as so re-numbered, for the words "it shall be
presented to the President for his assent and upon such assent being
given to the Bill,'1, the words "it shall be presented to the President
who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon" shall be substituted;
(d) after clause (2) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall
be inserted, namely: —
"(3) Nothing in article ISv shall apply to any amendment
made under this article.".

SEC. 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

491

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Supreme Court in the well-known Golak Nath's case [1967, 2 S.C.R.
762] reversed, by a narrow majority, its own earlier decisions upholding
the power of Parliament to amend all parts of the Constitution including
Part IH relating to fundamental rights- The result of the judgment is
that Parliament is considered to have no power to take away or curtail
any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution
even if it becomes necessary to do so for giving effect to the Directive
Principles of State Policy and for the attainment of the objectives set out
in the Preamble to the Constitution. It is, therefore, considered necessary
to provide expressly that Parliament has power to amend any provision
of the Constitution so as to include the provisions of Part III within the
scope of the amending power.
2. The Bill seeks to amend article 368 suitably for the purpose and
makes it clear that article 368 provides for amendment of the Constitution as well as procedure therefor. The Bill further provides that when
a Constitution Amendment Bill passed by both Houses of Parliament is
presented to the President for his assent, he should give his assent thereto. The Bill also seeks to amend article 13 of the Constitution to make it
inapplicable to any amendment of the Constitution undw article 368.
NEW DELHI;

The 22nd July, 1&71.

H. R. GOKHALE.

