AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON DEC 1986

To provide for the establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and for the matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 5th December, 1986
and referred to a Joint Committee of the Houses of Parliament on the 19th December, 1986. The
Committee presented its Report on the 18th March, 1987. The Rajya Sabha passed the Bill on the 10th
April, 1987. The Lok Sabha passed the Bill on the 14th April, 1987.

Bill No. 145 of 1986 THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986 A BILL further to amend the
Constitution of India. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:— 1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint. 2. After article 371G of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:— “371H. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— (a) the Governor of
Arunachal Pradesh shall have special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of
Arunachal Pradesh and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto, the Governor shall,
after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be
taken: Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Governor is under this clause required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment,
the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by
the Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted
in the exercise of his individual judgment:

Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from Governor or otherwise is
satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special responsibility with
respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may by order direct that the Governor
shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from such date as may be specified in the order;

(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall consist of not less than thirty
members.". STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India have proposed to confer statehood on the Union territory of Arunachal
Pradesh. It has also been proposed as follows:—

(i) Having regard to the sensitive location of Arunachal Pradesh, the Governor of the proposed new
State shall have special responsibility with respect to law and order in the State and in the
discharge of his functions thereto, the Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers,
exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be taken and this special responsibility of the
Governor shall cease when the President by order so directs;

(iii) the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Arunachal Praadesh shall consist of forty
members. But as it is proposed to make the existing thirty-member Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Arunachal Pradesh to be the provisional Legislative Assembly for the new State of
Arunachal Pradesh until elections are held on the expiry of the five year term of the existing
Assembly, it is proposed to provide that the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Arunachal
Pradesh shall consist of not less than thirty members.

2. In order to give effect to the above proposals, it is necessary to make special provisions in the
Constitution. This Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution to provide for the aforesaid
matters. A separate Bill for the establishment of the new State relatable to article 2 is also being
introduced.

NEW DELHI; The 1st December, 1986.

BUTA SINGH, Home Minister. LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affairs.)