At )t4rli!o4>()C~ 'N l..tJ1:.. ~/J1!JI1t- ()1\/
!lie .. ~ IH laGK SMJlA

<0'

BiU No. 78 of I,,!

THE CONSTITUTION (TWENTY-THIRD AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1969
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:1. This Act may be called the Constitution, (Twenty-third Amendment)
Act, 1969.

Short tide.

2. In article 330 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), for
the words "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam",
the words "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam and
in Nagaland" shall be substituted.

AmeDdment
of article

3. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words
.10 "except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam", the words
"except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of Assam and in Nagaland" shall be substituted.

Amendment
of article

to (1) In article 333 of the Constitution, for the words "nominate
such number of members of the community to the Assembly as he conIS siders appropriate", the words "nominate one member of that community
to the Assembly" shall be substituted.

Amendment
of article
333·

S

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect any representation of the Anglo-Indian community in th~ Legislative Assembly of any
State existing at the commencement of this Act until the dissolution of
..ao that Assembly.
5. In artlele 3M 01. the ConstltutiOll, for the words "twenty years".
the wwtJa "thirty ~ sball be subatttuted.

330·

333.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend article 334 of the Constitution toprovide for the continuance of the representation of the Anglo-Indian
community in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies
of the States by nomination for a further period of ten years from 26th
January, 1970. It is estimated that the recurring expenditure on the
salaries and allowances and other concessions, of the two representatives
of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the Peopl~ under article'
331, will be of the order of Rs. 50,000 per annum.
2. There will be no non-recurring expenditure.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

...

...


...


PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for...
...
...
...
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the
tribal areas of Assam; and


...

...


...

332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the tribal areas of
Assam, in the Legislative Assembly of every State.


...

...



Reservation
of seats for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in
the House
of the
People

RI..'Scrvation
of seats for
Sch~d\lled

Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in
the Legislative Assem-.
blies of the
States.

333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor of a State
may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately
represented therein, nominate such number of members of the community
to the Assembly as he considers appropriate.

Representation of the
Anglo-Indian
community
in the Legislative
Assemblies
of the States.

334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
the provisiOns of this Constitution relating to-

Reservation
of seats and
special representation
to cease after
twenty
years.

(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled

Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States; and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian communit; in the
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States
by nomination,
shall cease to have effe~t on the expiration of a period of twenty years
from the commencement of this Constitution:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in
the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until
the dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, as the case may
be.







STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of the
Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of the People and the Legislative
Assemblies of the States sball cease to have elect on the expiration of a
period of twenty years from the commencement of the Constitution.
Although the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have mad~ considerable progress in the last twenty years, the reasons which weighed
with the Constituent Assembly in making provisions with regard to the
aforesaid reservation of seats and nomination of members, have not ceased
to exist. It is, therefore, proposed to continue the reservation for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of
Anglo-Indians by nomination for a further period of ten years.
2. More than ninety per cent. of the population of the State of NUaland, which came into being in 1963, is tribal. It would be anomalous
to make provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in Legislatures in the States where they are in a majority. It is,
therefore, proposed, as desired by the Government of Nagaland, not to
make any reservation for the Scheduled Tribes in Nagaland either in the
House of the People or in the State Legislative Assembly. Articles 330
and 332 of the Constitution afe bemg amended for this purpQSe.
3. Under article 338 of the Constitution, the number of Anglo-Indians,
who may be nominated to the State Legislative Assemblies, is left to the
discretion of the Governor. It is now proposed to amend that article so
as to provide that not more than one Anglo-Indian should be nominated
by the Governor to any State Legislative Assembly. This amendment
will not however affect representation of the Anglo-Indian community
in the existing Legislative Assemblies until their dissolution.
NEW DELHI;
The lIth August, 1969.

P. GOVINDA MENON.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

