THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023

Act 106 of 2023

Published in Gazette of India on 28 September 2023

Assented to on 28 September 2023

Commenced on 28 September 2023

An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—1. Short title and commencement. 1 This Act may be called
the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023.2 It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.2. Amendment of
article 239AA. In article 239AA of the Constitution, in clause (2), after sub-clause (b), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—baSeats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.bbAs nearly as may be, one-third of the seats
reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi shall be reserved for women.bcAs nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to
be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes) shall be
reserved for women in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.”.3. Insertion of new article
330A. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—330A.
Reservation of seats for women in the House of the People. 1 Seats shall be reserved for women in
the House of the People.2 As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes.3 As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be
filled by direct election to the House of the People shall be reserved for women.”.4. Insertion of
new article 332A. After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—332A. Reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assemblies of the States1 Seats
shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every State.2 As nearly as may be,
one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved
for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.3 As nearly as may be, one-third
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative
Assembly of every State shall be reserved for women.5. Insertion of new article 334A. After article
334 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—334A. Reservation of seats
for women take effect.1 Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or Part
VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women in the House
of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken
for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first census taken after commencement of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement.2 Subject to the
provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats reserved for women in the House of the People,
the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi shall continue till such date as the Parliament may by law determine.3 Rotation of seats
reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each
subsequent exercise of delimitation as the Parliament may by law determine.4 Nothing in this article
shall affect any representation in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or
the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the
then existing House of the People, Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi.6. Amendment not to affect reservation in the House of the
People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi. 1 The amendments made to the Constitution by the Constitution (One Hundred and
Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 shall not affect any representation in the House of the People, the
Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi until the dissolution of the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be, in existence at
the commencement of the said Act.