442

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

B I L L N O . 55 OF

[PART it—

1972

A Bill -further to amiend the Constitution of hidia
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —
Short title
and commencement

Insertion
of newarticle
312A.
Power of
Parliament to
vary or
revoke
conditions
of service
of officers
of certain
services.

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Thirty-First Amendment) Act, 1972.
(2) It shall cotne into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 312 of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely: —
"312A. (1) Parliament may by law—
(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively,
the conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who,
having been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of
State in Counpil to a civil service of the Crown in India before the
commencement of this Constitution, continue on and after the
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-First Amendment)
Act, 1972, to serve under the Government of India or of a State
in any service or post;

SEC. 2]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

443

(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively,
the conditions of service as respects pension of persons who, having
been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State
in Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be
in service at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-First Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided that in the case of any such person who is holding or has
held the office of the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme
Court or a High Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India,
the Chairman or other member of the Union or a State Public Service
Commission or the Chief Election Commissioner, nothing in sub-clause
(a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as empowering Parliament to
vary or revoke, after his appointment to such post, the conditions of
his service to his disadvantage except in so far as such conditions ol
service are applicable to him by reason of his being a person appointed
by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil
service of the Crown in India.
(2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament by law under,
this article, nothing in this article shall affect the power of any; legislature or other authority under any other provision of this Constitution
to regulate the conditions of service of persons referred to in clause
(1).
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have
jurisdiction in—
(o) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument which was entered into or executed by any person referred
to in clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person,
in relation to his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in
India or his continuance in service under the Government of the
Dominion of India or a Province thereof;
(b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability or obligation
under article 314 as originally enacted.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision
of this Constitution.".
3. Article 314 of the Constitution shall be omitted,

Omission
of article
314.

444

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PABT II—

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 314 of the Constitution gurantees to persons who were appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
civil service of the Crown in India and who continued to serve after the
commencement of the Constitution under the Government of India or
of a State the same conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave
and pension and the same rights as respects disciplinary matters or
rights as similar thereto as changed circumstances may permit, as such
persons were entitled to immediately before such commencement. The
concept of a class of officers with immutable conditions of service is
Incompatible with the changed social order. It is, therefore, considered
necessary to amend the Constitution to provide for the deletion of
article 314 and for the inclusion of a new article 312A which confers
powers on Parliament to vary or revoke by law the conditions of service
of the officers aforesaid and contains appropriate consequential and
incidental provisions.
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objects.
NEW DELHI;

RAM NIWAS MIRDHA.

The 22nd May, 1972.

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 14|2|72-AIS(II), dated the 20th May, 1972, from
Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home
Affairs and in the Department of Personnel, to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.]
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill
further to amend the Constitution of India, recommends, under clause
(1) of article 117, the introduction of the said Bill in the Lok Sabha.

