TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 71 of 2017

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD

AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-third

Amendment) Act, 2017.

5

Short title and

commencement.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 338 of the Constitution, in clause (10), the words, brackets and figures "to

such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission

appointed under clause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also" shall be omitted.

Amendment of

article 338.

S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\5739LS

2

Insertion of

new article

338B.

3. After article 338A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

National

Commission

for Backward

Classes.

“338B. (1) There shall be a Commission for the socially and educationally

backward classes to be known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the

Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members

and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson

and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.

5

(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission

shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

10

(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—

(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided

for the socially and educationally backward classes under this Constitution or

under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the

Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;

15

(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of

rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally backward classes;

(c) to advise on the socio-economic development of the socially and

educationally backward classes and to evaluate the progress of their development

under the Union and any State;

20

(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the

Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;

(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the measures that

should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of

those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socioeconomic development of the
socially and educationally backward classes; and

(f ) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare

and development and advancement of the socially and educationally backward

classes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by

Parliament, by rule specify.

25

30

(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of

Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be

taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the nonacceptance, if any, of
any of such recommendations.

(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which

any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the

Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State

along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the

recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any,

of any of such recommendations.

(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in subclause (a) or inquiring
into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5),

35

40

S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\5739LS

3

have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the

following matters, namely:—

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part

of India and examining him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

5

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or

office;

(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

10

and

(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.

(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all

major policy matters affecting socially and educationally backward classes.

4. After article 342 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

Insertion of new

article 342 A.

15

"342A. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and

where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification,

specify the socially and educationally backward classes which shall for the purposes

of this Constitution be deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in

relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.

Socially and

educationally

backward

classes.

20

(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of socially

and educationally backward classes specified in a notification issued under clause (1)

any socially and educationally backward class, but save as aforesaid a notification

issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.".

5. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause (26B), the following clause shall be

2 5 inserted, namely:—

‘(26C) "socially and educationally backward classes" means the backward classes

as are so deemed under article 342A for the purposes of this Constitution;’.

Amendment of

article 366.

S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\5654LS\5654LS

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes came into

being consequent upon passing of the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990. The

said Commission was constituted on 12th March, 1992 replacing the Commission for the

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes set up under the Resolution of 1987. Under article

338 of the Constitution, the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

Tribes was constituted with the objective of monitoring all the safeguards provided for the

Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution or other laws.

2. Vide the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, a separate National

Commission for Scheduled Tribes was created by inserting a new article 338A in the

Constitution. Consequently, under article 338 of the Constitution, the reference was restricted

to the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes. Under clause (10) of article 338 of the

Constitution, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes is presently empowered to

look into the grievances and complaints of discrimination of Other Backward Classes

also.

3. In the year 1992, the Supreme Court of India in the matter of Indra Sawhney and

others Vs. Union of India and others (AIR 1993, SC 477) had directed the Government of

India to constitute a permanent body for entertaining, examining and recommending requests

for inclusion and complaints of over-inclusion and under-inclusion in the Central List of

Other Backward Classes. Pursuant to the said Judgment, the National Commission for

Backward Classes Act was enacted in April, 1993 and the National Commission for Backward

Classes was constituted on 14th August, 1993 under the said Act. At present the functions

of the National Commission for Backward Classes is limited to examining the requests for

inclusion of any class of citizens as a backward class in the Lists and hear complaints of

over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any backward class in such lists and tender such

advice to the Central Government as it deems appropriate. Now, in order to safeguard the

interests of the socially and educationally backward classes more effectively, it is proposed

to create a National Commission for Backward Classes with constitutional status at par with

the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled

Tribes.

4. The National Commission for the Scheduled Castes has recommended in its Report

for 2014-15 that the handling of the grievances of the socially and educationally backward

classes under clause (10) of article 338 should be given to the National Commission for

Backward Classes.

5. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Constitution of India, inter alia,

to provide the following, namely:—

(a) to insert a new article 338 so as to constitute the National Commission for

Backward Classes which shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three

other Members. The said Commission will hear the grievances of socially and

educationally backward classes, a function which has been discharged so far by the

National Commission for Scheduled Castes under clause (10) of article 338; and

4

S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\5739LS

5

(b) to insert a new article 342A so as to provide that the President may, by public

notification, specify the socially and educationally backward classes which shall for

the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be socially and educationally backward

classes.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

NEW DELHI;

The 30th March, 2017.

THAAWARCHAND GEHLOT.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the National Commission

for Backward Classes shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other

Members and the conditions of service of tenure of the offices of the Chairperson,

Vice-Chairperson and Members so appointed shall be such as the President may, by rule

determine.

2. The requirement of funds for the establishment cost of the aforesaid Members of

the Commission as well as for the existing staff of the National Commission for Backward

Classes, who shall stand transferred to the establishment of the National Commission for

Backward Classes constituted under article 338B will be the same as is budgeted and

allocated for the National Commission for Backward Classes. The budget for the National

Commission for Backward Classes for, the year 2016-17 is Rs. 4.80 crore. There shall be no

additional financial implication on account of creation of the National Commission for

Backward Classes, since it will not only be taking on the existing staff strength of the

National Commission for Backward Classes without any increment, but also utilise the same

office premises that was being used by the National Commission for Backward Classes.

6

S 3 \F\BILL 2017\LS\5654LS\5654LS

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

*

*

*

*

*

338. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the

National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.

*

*

*

*

*

(10) In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes shall be construed as

including references to such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt

of the report of a Commission appointed under clause (1) of article 340, by order

specify and also to the Anglo-Indian community.

*

*

*

7

*

*

National

Commission

for Scheduled

Castes.

LOK SABHA

————

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

————

(Shri Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)

GMGIPMRND—5739LS(S3)—30-03-2017.