The Gazette of India

EXTRAORDINARY PART II — Section 2 PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

No. 72] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, DECEMBER 20, 2005 / AGRAHAYANA 29, 1927

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

LOK SABHA

The following Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2005:—

BILL NO. 160 OF 2005

A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Fourth Amendment) Act, 2005.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

"(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so
far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including
private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30." THE GAZETTE OF INDIA
EXTRAORDINARY

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Greater access to higher education including professional education, to a larger number of students
belonging to the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, has been a matter of major concern. The reservation of seats for the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of citizens (OBCs) in admission to
educational institutions is derived from the provisions of clause (4) of article 15. At present, the
number of seats available in aided or State maintained institutions, particularly in respect of
professional education, is limited in comparison to those in private unaided institutions.

2. It is laid down in article 46, as a directive principle of State policy, that the State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the
people and protect them from social injustice. Access to education is important in order to ensure
advancement of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the socially and
educationally backward classes also referred to as the OBCs.

3. Clause (1) of article 30 provides the right to all minorities to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice. It is essential that the rights available to minorities
are protected in regard to institutions established and administered by them. Accordingly,
institutions declared by the State to be minority institutions under clause (1) of article 30 are
omitted from the operation of the proposal.

4. To promote the educational advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens i.e. the OBCs or of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in matters of admission of
students belonging to these categories in unaided educational institutions, other than the minority
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution, it is proposed
to amplify article 15. The new clause (5) shall enable the Parliament as well as the State
Legislatures to make appropriate laws for the purposes mentioned above.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Delhi; The 19th December, 2005 ARJUN SINGH

P. D. T. ACHARY, Secretary General.

PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE
CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2005. MGIPMRND—4735LS(S3)—18.01.2006.