O.B.(II)No. 7.

LOK SABHA

THE CONSTITUTION (THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954

(Report of the Joint Committee)

[National Emblem]

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI

September, 1954 Reports of the Select/Joint Committee Report presented in the Lok Sabha in the year,
1954. ----

S.No. | S u b j e c t | Date of | | presentation

SIXTH SESSION

1. Muslim Wakfs Bill, 1952 (S.C.) 4.3.54.

2. Special Marriage Bill, 1952 (J.C.) 18.3.54.

SEVENTH SESSION

1. Coffee Market (Expansion Amendment) Bill, 1954 (S.C.) 26.8.54.

2. Rubber (Production & Marketing) Amendment Bill, 1950 together with the Evidence on the bill dated
the 21st and 22nd July, 1954 (S.C.) -do-

3. Displaced persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Bill, 1954 (J.C.) 27.8.54

4. Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend- ment) Bill, 1954 (J.C.) 3.9.54.

5. Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill, 1952. (J.C.) 20.9.54

EIGHTH SESSION

1. Hindu Marriage & Divorce Bill, 1952. (J.C.) 26.11.54

2. Untouchability (Offences) Bill, 1954 (J.C.) 3.12.54

3. Delimitation Commission (Amend- ment) Bill, 1954. (S.C.) 22.12.54 CONTENTS

PAGES

1. Composition of the Joint Committee . . . . . . i—ii 2. Report of the Joint Committee . . . . . .
iii 3. Minute of Dissent . . . . . . iv—vi 4. Bill as amended by the Joint Committee. . . . . . . 1

APPENDIX I— Motion in the Lok Sabha for reference of the Bill to Joint Committee. . . . . . . 2

APPENDIX II— Motion in the Rajya Sabha. . . . . . . 3

APPENDIX III— The Minutes of the Meetings of the Joint Committee. . . . . . . 4—7 Annexure to the
Minutes. . . . . . . 8 THE CONSTITUTION (THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954

Composition of the Joint Committee

LOK SABHA

1. Shri Jawaharlal Nehru—Chairman. 2. Shri Rafi Ahmed Kidwai. 3. Shri Upendranath Barman. 4. Shri V.
B. Gandhi. 5. Shri Kotha Raghuramaiah. 6. Shri Narhar Vishnu Gadgil. 7. Shri Tek Chand. 8. Shri A.
M. Thomas. 9. Shri S. Sinha. 10. Shri C. D. Pande. 11. Shri Raghubir Sahai. 12. Shri Shriman Narayan
Agarwal. 13. Shri R. Venkatraman. 14. Shri Nemi Chandra Kasliwal. 15. Shri Raghavendarao Srinivasrao
Diwan. 16. Shri Liladhar Joshi. 17. Shri Ranbir Singh Chaudhuri. 18. Shri K. S. Raghavachari. 19.
Shri Bhawani Singh. 20. Shri N. C. Chatterjee. 21. Dr. D. Ramchander. 22. Dr. A. Krishnaswami. 23.
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari.

RAJYA SABHA

24. Shri C. C. Biswas. 25. Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao. 26. Shri Biswanath Das. 27. Shri
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. 28. Dr. W. S. Barlingay. 29. Shri Jagan Nath Kaushal. 30. Shri Chandulal P.
Parikh. 31. Shri R. C. Gupta. 32. Shri V. Venkataramana. 33. Shrimati Parvathi Krishnan. 34. Shri H.
C. Mathur. 35. Shri B. C. Ghose.

SECRETARIAT

Shri M. N. Kaul, Secretary. Shri S. L. Shakdher, Joint Secretary. Report of the Joint Committee

I, the Chairman of the Joint Committee to which the Bill* further to amend the Constitution of India
was referred, having been authorised to submit the report on their behalf, present their Report,
with the Bill as passed by the Committee annexed thereto.

2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 6th September, 1954. The motion for reference of
the Bill to a Joint Committee of the Houses (vide Appendix I) was moved by Shri T. T. Krishnamachari
on the 10th September, 1954, discussed on the 10th and 11th September, 1954 and adopted on the 13th
September, 1954.

3. The Rajya Sabha discussed the motion on the 15th and the 16th September, 1954 and concurred in
the said motion on the 16th September, 1954 (vide Appendix II).

4. The Committee held two sittings—on the 17th and the 18th September, 1954.

5. The Committee have considered the Bill and are of the opinion that the powers sought to be
transferred to the concurrent list are necessary in the national interest. The Committee approve of
the Bill as introduced in the House subject to a verbal change in clause (a) of the proposed entry
33. The clause as amended reads as follows:—

"(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as
such products;"

6. The Committee recommend that the Bill as amended be passed.

NEW DELHI; The 20th September, 1954.

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU, Chairman Joint Committee.

*Published in Part II—Section 2 of the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated the 6th September,
1954. Minute of Dissent

We are definitely of the opinion that the Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill, if passed into law as
it stands, will constitute a serious encroachment on the rights and powers of the constituent units
of the Indian Republic. Such powers were deliberately con- ferred on the States by the makers of the
Constitution. It is perfectly clear that the Constituent Assembly wanted to confer concurrent powers
of legislation on Parliament in respect of matters specified in article 369 only for a limited
period. That period was consciously limited to a period of 5 years. That decision was taken after
full and careful consideration of the tenure of Parliament's powers to make such laws which are
exclusively in the State List. Sugges- tions were put forward in the Constituent Assembly to
increase the period from 5 to 10 to 15 years but these were turned down. Obvious- ly the framers of
the Indian Constitution did not want to confer such powers on Parliament for an indefinite period.

Under article 246 of the Constitution, the Legislature of any State has exclusive powers to make
laws with respect to matters enu- merated in List II of the Seventh Schedule (State List). Although
the Constituent Assembly framed Concurrent List of subjects over which the Union and the States
would have concurrent powers of legislation, the Constitution makers did not desire to place matters
enumerated in article 369 in the Concurrent List. What powers would really be left to State
Legislatures if Parliament takes over for itself powers to frame laws in regard to trade and
commerce with- in a State in respect of raw cotton, food-stuffs, jute, cattle fodder, oilseeds,
etc.? State autonomy would be rendered illusory and State powers and rights would be progressively
pulverised if Parlia- ment exercises legislative powers and functions over these subjects.
Immediately Parliament in its legislative judgment enacts appro- priate laws within the ambit of its
legislative competence in respect of certain matters, then the legislative authority of State
Legisla- tures is pro tanto abrogated. Under article 369 if Parliament fully exercises its
authority, as it has already substantially done, the doc- trine of "occupied field" will preclude
the States from exercising their legislative powers in respect of these matters. The undesirabi-
lity of thus permanently depriving the State Legislatures from effec- tively exercising their
legislative judgment in respect of certain vital matters which are inherently appurtenant to the
State field weighed with the Constituent Assembly in refusing to grant a longer lease under article
369 to Parliament. We are fully alive to the necessity of clothing Parliament with necessary
authority to keep certain matters under Union control in view of the needs of planning. The
situation which confronted the Constituent Assembly when framing the Constitution was not basically
different from what it is today. The framers of the Constitution were also fully alive to the needs
of planning and the maintenance of control by the Centre over specified matters. Nevertheless they
came to the considered decision that legislative powers in respect of these commodities should be
outside the competence of Parliament's authority after a specified period. It will not be right and
proper for this Parliament to amplify Entry 33 in List III of Schedule VII of the Constitution so as
to make Parliament's Legislative power a permanent feature of our Constitution. We recognise that
this is going to be placed in the Concurrent List. Yet we should point out that the permanent
enactment enlarging Entry 33 has been either opposed or not accepted by a large number of State
Governments. The Government of Bihar has clearly expressed its opposition to the permanent transfer
of the items in question to the Concurrent List. That Government has suggested temporary retention
of powers by the Centre by keeping alive Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946 for a
further period of 5 years or so through a suitable amendment of article 369 of the Constitution.
After giving our careful consideration to the weighty observations of Ministers in the Joint
Committee as also the considered views of the different State Governments, we feel that, if
necessary, the Government of Bihar's proposal may be accepted.

The Psychological aspect of this important constitutional problem should also be taken into account.
Nothing should be done to make the States feel that Parliament in the plenitude of its powers has
chosen to keep the sword of Damocles hanging over the heads of various units. The assumption of such
wide powers by the Centre will cripple the initiative of the States. Local and regional enterprise
so essential for a more even development of industries in different States is likely to be paralysed
by a concentration of power at the Centre. It should not be ignored that the success of planning
depends upon the willing co-operation of the States.

A good deal of reliance has been placed by the Government on the Report of the Commodities Control
Committee in support of this Bill. It should be emphasised that it was not within the purview of
this Committee to enquire into the question of distribution of powers as between the Centre and the
States. Its scope was limited. It was set up "to examine the existing controls and streamline the
various control orders and notifications issued by the Government of India". Without casting any
reflection on any individual member of the Committee, we deem it our duty to point out that 4 out of
the 5 members of the Committee were either Joint Secretaries or Deputy Secretaries to the four
Ministries of the Central Government, and when one Joint Secretary left India on official duty, an
Economic and Statistical Adviser to the Government of India was appointed in his place. It is a
matter for regret that not one representative of the State Governments was represented on the
Committee. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Committee viewed with favour a permanent
accession of powers to the Centre at the expense of the States.

Fully conscious of the responsibilities of our position as represen- tatives of the people as well
as of the States, we deem it our duty to caution Parliament not to confer upon the Centre
permanently legal powers to control the supply and distribution of vital comino- dities essential to
the building up of the economy of States. We are definitely of the opinion that the Centre must be
divested of legal powers of control after a specified period of time over these com- modities. We
suggest that the period specified in Article 369, if its extension be considered essential, may be
altered so as to make the total period of Parliament's competence extend up to ten years.

N. C. CHATTERJEE. K. S. RAGHAVACHARI. A. KRISHNASWAMY. PARVATHI KRISHNAN. BIMAL COMMAR GHOSH. V.
VENKATARAMANA. HARISH CHANDRA MATHUR.

NEW DELHI; The 20th September, 1954. Bill No. 40B of 1954

THE CONSTITUTION (THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954

(AS AMENDED BY THE JOINT COMMITTEE)

(Words underlined indicate the amendments suggested by the Committee)

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. Short title.—This Act may be called the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, 1954.

2. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.—In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, for entry 33 of
List III, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—

"33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,—

(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest. and imported goods of the same kind as
such products;

(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;

(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concen- trates;

(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and

(e) raw jute.". APPENDIX I Motion in the Lok Sabha

"That the Bill further to amend the Constitution of India, be referred to a Joint Committee of the
Houses consisting of 35 members; 23 from this House, namely:— 1. Shri Jawaharlal Nehru 2. Shri Rafi
Ahmed Kidwai 3. Shri Upendranath Barman 4. Shri V. B. Gandhi 5. Shri Kotha Raghuramaiah 6. Shri
Narhar Vishnu Gadgil [?] 7. Shri Tek Chand 8. Shri A. M. Thomas 9. Shri S. Sinha 10. Shri C. D.
Pande 11. Shri Raghubir Sahai 12. Shri Shriman Narayan Agarwal 13. Shri R. Venkatraman 14. Shri Nemi
Chandra Kasliwal 15. Shri Raghavendrarao Srinivasarao Diwan 16. Shri Liladhar Joshi 17. Shri Ranbir
Singh Chaudhuri 18. Shri K. S. Raghavachari 19. Shri Bhawani Singh 20. Shri N. C. Chatterjee 21. Dr.
D. Ramchander 22. Dr. A. Krishnaswami 23. Shri T. T. Krishnamachari and 12 members from the Rajya
Sabha;

that in order to constitute a sitting of the Joint Committee the quorum shall be one-third of the
total number of members of the Joint Committee;

that the Committee shall make a report to this House by the 20th September, 1954;

that in other respects the Rules of Procedure of this House relating to Parliamentary Committees
will apply with such varia- tions and modifications as the Speaker may make; and

that this House recommends to the Rajya Sabha that the Rajya Sabha do join the said Joint Committee
and communicate to the Lok Sabha the names of members to be appointed by the Rajya Sabha to the
Joint Committee." APPENDIX II Motion in the Rajya Sabha

"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that the Rajya Sabha do join in the
Joint Committee of the Houses on the Bill further to amend the Constitution of India and resolves
that the following members of the Rajya Sabha be nominat- ed to serve on the said Joint Committee:—

1. Shri C. C. Biswas 2. Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao 3. Shri Biswanath Das 4. Shri Fakhruddin Ali
Ahmed 5. Dr. W. S. Barlingay 6. Shri Jagan Nath Kaushal 7. Shri Chandulal P. Parikh 8. Shri R. C.
Gupta 9. Shri V. Venkataramana 10. Shrimati Parvathi Krishnan 11. Shri H. C. Mathur 12. Shri B. C.
Ghose." APPENDIX III

Minutes of the Meetings of the Joint Committee on the Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill, 1954 I

FIRST MEETING

The First Meeting of the Joint Committee on the Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill. 1954 was held
on Friday, the 17th Septem- ber, 1954 at 6 P.M. in Committee Room No. 62, Parliament House, New
Delhi.

2. The following were present:

LOK SABHA

1. Shri Jawaharlal Nehru—Chairman 2. Shri Rafi Ahmed Kidwai 3. Shri Upendranath Barman 4. Shri V. B.
Gandhi 5. Shri Kotha Raghuramaiah 6. Shri Narhar Vishnu Gadgil 7. Shri Tek Chand 8. Shri A. M.
Thomas 9. Shri S. Sinha 10. Shri Raghubir Sahai 11. Shri Shriman Narayan Agarwal 12. Shri R.
Venkatraman 13. Shri Nemi Chandra Kasliwal 14. Shri Raghavendrarao Srinivasrao Diwan 15. Shri
Liladhar Joshi 16. Shri Ranbir Singh Chaudhuri 17. Shri K. S. Raghavachari 18. Shri Bhawani Singh
19. Shri N. C. Chatterjee 20. Dr. A. Krishnaswami 21. Shri T. T. Krishnamachari

RAJYA SABHA

22. Shri C. C. Biswas 23. Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao 24. Shri Biswanath Das 25. Shri Fakhruddin
Ali Ahmed 26. Dr. W. S. Barlingay 27. Shri Jagan Nath Kaushal 28. Shri Chandulal P. Parikh 29. Shri
R. C. Gupta 30. Shri V. Venkataramana 31. Shrimati Parvathi Krishnan 32. Shri H. C. Mathur 33. Shri
B. C. Ghose.

Shri K. V. K. Sundaram, Special Secretary, Ministry of Law. Shri L. K. Jha, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

SECRETARIAT

Shri M. N. Kaul, Secretary. Shri S. L. Shakdher, Joint Secretary.

3. At the outset an amendment (vide Annexure) to clauses 1 and 2 of the Bill was moved by Dr. A.
Krishnaswami. The Committee then deliberated upon the question whether the concurrent powers sought
to be given to the Centre under the Bill should be on a permanent basis or only for a limited
period. After discussion the point was put to the vote and it was declared—26 voting in favour; 7
against—that the concurrent powers should be given to the Centre on a permanent basis.

4. The Committee then took up consideration of the clauses of the Bill and after some discussion,
the Committee decided that it was not necessary to make any changes in the Bill as introduced in the
House.

5. The Committee decided that the draft Report would be con- sidered on Saturday the 18th September,
1954.

6. The Committee adjourned at 8-15 P.M. to meet at 5-10 P.M. on the 18th September, 1954. II

SECOND MEETING

The Second Meeting of the Joint Committee on the Constitution (Third Amendment) Bill, 1954 was held
on Saturday, the 18th Sep- tember, 1954 at 5-10 P.M. in Committee Room No. 62, Parliament House, New
Delhi.

2. The following were present :

LOK SABHA

1. Shri Jawaharlal Nehru—Chairman 2. Shri Rafi Ahmed Kidwai 3. Shri Upendranath Barman 4. Shri V. B.
Gandhi 5. Shri Kotha Raghuramaiah 6. Shri A. M. Thomas 7. Shri S. Sinha 8. Shri Raghubir Sahai 9.
Shri R. Venkatraman 10. Shri Nemi Chandra Kasliwal 11. Shri Raghavendrarao Srinivasrao Diwan 12.
Shri K. S. Raghavachari 13. Shri Bhawani Singh 14. Shri N. C. Chatterjee 15. Dr. A. Krishnaswami 16.
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari

RAJYA SABHA

17. Shri C. C. Biswas 18. Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao 19. Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed 20. Dr. W. S.
Barlingay 21. Shri Jagan Nath Kaushal 22. Shri Chandulal P. Parikh 23. Shri R. C. Gupta 24. Shri V.
Venkataramana 25. Shrimati Parvathi Krishnan 26. Shri H. C. Mathur 27. Shri B. C. Ghose.

Shri K. V. K. Sundaram, Special Secretary, Ministry of Law.

Shri L. K. Jha, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

SECRETARIAT

Shri M. N. Kaul, Secretary. Shri S. L. Shakdher, Joint Secretary.

3. The Committee considered the draft Report. It was suggested that the intention behind clause (a)
of the proposed entry 33 should be clarified. The Committee agreed to the following redraft of this
clause:— "(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and imported goods of the same
kind as such products;"

4. The Committee decided that Minutes of Dissent, if any, should be handed over to the Notice Office
of the Lok Sabha before 11 A.M. on Sunday, the 19th September, 1954.

5. The Committee then adjourned at 5-30 P.M. ANNEXURE

New Clause 1A.

1. In page 1. after line 4. insert :

'1A. Amendment of Art. 369.—In Article 369 of the Constitution—

(1) for the words "five years" the words "ten years" be substituted;

(2) for clause (a) of Article 369 the following clause be substituted :—

"Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,—

(a) the products of any industry the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law
to be expedient in public interest and import- ed goods of the same kind as such products; (b)
foodstuffs, including edible oilseed and oils; (c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other con-
centrates; (d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and (e) raw jute." '

Clause 2.

2. In page 1, for lines 5—19, substitute:

"2.(1) Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.—In the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution entry 33 of
List III be omitted.

(2) This amendment shall have effect for a period of five years from the date of commencement of
this Act." GIPD—LAD— LS—18-9-54—1770