TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. XX of 2009.

THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND NINTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

A BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Ninth Amendment) Bill, 2009.

(2) It shall come into force on the 25th day of January, 2010.

2. In article 334 of the Constitution, for the words "sixty years", the words "seventy years" shall
be substituted. STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 334 of the Constitution lays down that the provisions of the Constitution relating to the
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the representation of the
Anglo-Indian community by nomination in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of
the States shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period of sixty years from the
commencement of the Constitution. In other words, these provisions will cease to have effect on the
25th January, 2010, if not extended further.

2. Although the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have made considerable progress in the
last sixty years, the reasons which weighed with the Constituent Assembly in making provisions with
regard to the aforesaid reservation of seats and nomination of members have not ceased to exist. It
is, therefore, proposed to continue the reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes and the representation of the Anglo-Indian community by nomination for a further period of
ten years.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

NEW DELHI; The 27th July, 2009.

M. VEERAPPA MOILY. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 334 of the
Constitution to provide for the continuous representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House
of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination for a further period of
ten years. The expenditure incurred during the financial year was Rs. 10,08,000 under the head
salary and Rs. 1,48,766 under the head Traveling Allowance and Daily Allowance on two Members of the
Anglo-Indian Community nominated from Raipur and Dehradoon. The financial expenditure on Traveling
Allowance and Daily Allowance would depend upon the place from where such Members are nominated. It
is not practicable to exactly assess the financial expenditure on Traveling Allowance and Daily
Allowance to be incurred on such Members.

2. There will be no non-recurring expenditure. RAJYA SABHA

A BILL further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri M. Veerappa Moily, Minister of Law and Justice)

GMGIPMRND—3404RS(S5)—28-07-2009.