BW No.8' of 1,620

THE CONSTITUTION (FOURTEENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962


(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
ON 30TH AUGUST, 1962)

"RLIAMENT
UlftAll
..
. . , ..

.- ..... . .

~

,

.:-,.N"~·············"·"7.~
..' 01)' Jl .of, 2---,
v~~,~ .:"",jJ"JP"'-


I",

Bill No. 86 of 196Z.


THE CONSTITUTION (FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT),
BILL,Ig62
(As INTRODUCED IN' LOK SABKA)
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution 01 India.

BE it en~cted by Parliament in the
Republic of India as follows:-

Thirteenth

Year of the

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fourteenth Amend- Short title.
ment) Act, 1962.
S

2. In artIele 81 of the CoiIdtUtton, hisaklause (b) of elause' (1), Mren,dtnerit,'8 .
o art C c J.
for the words "twenty members", the wonts "twenty-five members"
shall be substituted.

3. In the' First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading Amend~ent
"II. THE UNION TERRITORIES", after entry 8, the following entry ~~~~dur~~t
.to shall be inserted, namely:"9. Pondicheny., The territomes which immediately before
the sixteenth day of August, 196Z, weR
comprised in the Prench Establishments
in India known as Pondicherry, Karika',
IS
Mahe and Yanam.".
4. After article 239 of the Constitution, the following article Insertion of
new article
sh all be inserte~, namely: Z39A.
"Z39A. (1) Parliament may by law create for any of the Creation 01
Union territories of Himachal Pradesh Manipur Tripora Goa local Legis
,
"
latures or
zo
Daman and Diu, and PondicherryCouncil or
Ministers or
(a) a body, whether nominated or elected or partly both for
nominated and partly elected, to function !lS a Legislature cu~ajn .
nlOn terrlfor the Union territory, or
toriea.
(


I
(b) a couaeU of MiDlsters,

or both with such constitution, powers and fuBCtioDS, in each
ease, a. may be lpecified in the law.

(Z) Azly such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the 5
purposes of ;lrticle 368 notwithstanding that it contains any
provision which amends or has the' effect of amending this
Constitution....
Amendnleat
ofartic:le
~.

I. In article 240, in clause (1),(a) after entry (d), the following entry shall be inserted, 10
namely:"(e) Pondicherry.:";

'(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:"Provided that when any body is created under article 15
239A to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of
Goa, Daman and Diu or Pondicherry, the President shall not
make any regulation for the peace, progress and good
government of that Union territory with effect from the date
20
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.".
AmeadllleBt

of the
Pourth
Schedule.

6. In the Fourth Schedule, in the' Table,(a) after entry 20, the entry

"21. Pondicherry ... 1" shall be inserted;

(b) for the figures "225", the figures "226" shall be substi-

tuted.
rtetrospecti". operation or
certaill
provisions.

,. Section 3 and clau~e (a) of section 5 shall be' deemed to have
come into force on the 16th day of August, 1962.

2S


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the ratification of the Treaty of Cession by the Governments of India and France, on the 16th August, 1962, the French
establishments of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam became
territories of the Indian Union with effect from that date. This
Bill provides for these territories being specified in the Constitution
itself as a Union territory called 'Pondicherry'. Under article
81 (1) (b) of the Constitution, not more than twenty members are
to repr~nt the Union territories in the House of the People. This
maximum. has already been reached. The Bill accordingly seeks
to increase this number to twenty."tive to enable representation
being given immediately to Pondicherry in the House of the People
and to provide for future contingencies. The Bill also provides
for representation of the territory in the Council of States.
.
It is proposed to create Legislatures and Councils of Ministers
in the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura,
Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry broadly on the pattern of
the scheme which was in force in some of the Part C States before
the reorganisation of the States. The Bill seeks to confer necessary
legislative power on Parliament to enact laws for this purpose
through a new article 239A which follows generally the provisionl
of article 240 as it stood before the reorganisation of the States.

.

LAL BAHADUR.
NEW DELHI;
The 25th August, 1962.


rINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
~he Bill provides for(a) the maximum number of sea,ts in the House of the
People for members representing the Union territories being
raised from twenty to twenty-five (clause 2);

(b) the French establishments in India known as Pond!cherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam being specified in the Constitution itself as a Union territory (clause S);
(c) pawers being conferred on Parliament to CPeate by
.law legislatures and Councils of Ministers for the Union territorie. (clause 4) ; and
'.

(d) allocation of one seat in the Rajya Sabha to the Union
territory of Pondicherry (claUie 6).
2. The provision at (a), when it is fully utilised, and the proVision at (d) will altogether involve an expenditure of Rs. 60,000
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of
I8laries and allowances of Members of Parliament.
3. Consequent on the agreement reached between the Govern··
ments of India and France regarding de facto transfer of former
French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam,
the administration of these territories was vested in the Government of India with effect from 1st November, 1954. Since that
date all expenditure connected with the administration of these
territories is being met out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
4. During the current budget year, the revenue of the' former
French establishments has been estimated at Rs. 2,31,05,500 and
expenditure at about Rs. 4,45,32,000, showing a deficit of
Rs. 2,14,26,500. With the integration of these areas into the Indian
Union as a Union territory, the financial administration of the terrItory will undergo some changes. It is not, however, pos.ible at th1a
stage to estimate the result of such possible changes. Generally, It
is estimated that a substantial part of the expenditure on the territory will continue to be met by he Union Government from the
Central revenues for some years to come.
"'
.1

1 . _


1. ,.

5. Some expenditure will be incurred as and when legislatures
and Councils of Ministers are created for the five Union territories in
pursuance of the provisionsofolause 4: of the Bill. It is not possible to estimate precisely this amount but it is likely to be of the
order of about Rs. 20 ·lakhs per annum. This expenditure will initially be met from the Consolidated Fund of the territory concerned. However, it will have to be taken into account in determining
the ftnancial assistance which may be given to these territories by
'way of grants from the Consolidated Fund of' India.


ANNEXURE


EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION or INDIA

*


81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the Composition
People shall consist ofof the Houle
oft he
(a) not more than five hundred members chosen by direct People.
election from territorial constituencies in the States, and

(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may be law
provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),there $hall be allotted to each State a number of seats
in the House of the People in such manner that the ratio between
that number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States; and
(a)

(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies
in such manner that the ratio between the popUlation of each
cohstituency and the nwnber of seats allotted to it is, so far a~
practicable, the same throughout the' State.
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the Population as ascertained at the last preceding census ot which the
relevant figures have be'en published.




240. (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, Power of
Prcsidentto
progress and good government of the Union territory ofmate repl..
tiODI for
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
certain
(b) the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands;
UDiaD territories.
(c)'Dadra and Nagar Haveli;
(d) Goa, Daman and Diu.
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any, Act made
by Parliament or any existing law which is for the time beine
applicable t,) the Union territory and, when promulgated by the
President, shall have the' same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.




FIRST SCHEDULE




II.





THE UNION TERRITORIES

Name

Extent

I. Delhi

'Ilte territory which immediately before

2. Himachal Pradesh

The territories which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
were being administered as if they were
Chief Commissioners' Provinces under the
names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur.

3. Manipur'

The
territory which immediately before
the commenCement of this Constitution
was being administered as if it were a
Chief Commissioner's Province under the
name of Manipur.
.

4. Tripura

The territory which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
was being administered as if it were a
Chief Commissioner's Province under
the.,name of Tripura.

s· The Andaman and Nico-

The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
comprised iri the Chid" Commissioner's
Province of the Andaman and, Nicobar
Islands.

6. The La~dive, Minicoy
and Amindivi Islands.

The territory specified in section 6 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

7· Dadra and Nagar Haveli

The territory which immediately before the
eleventh day of August, 1961 wa.c; comprised in Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli .

the commencement of this Constitution
was comprised in the Chief Commissioner's Province of Delhi.

bar Islands.

8.

...

Goa. Daman and Diu .

The territories which immediately before
tbe'l,!.wentieth day of December, 1961
were 1.comprised in Goa, Daman and
Diu.





FOURTH SCHBDULB



[Artidcs 4(1) and 8o(2.)J

AlloctJlion- of sealS in the Courrcil of States
To each State or Union territory specified in the first colUllll1 of the
following table, there shall be- allotted the number of seats specified in the
second colUlllR thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, u the
case may.
TABLE
I. Andh.ra Pradesh

IS

2. Assam

3. Bihar

7
22

4. Gujarat

II

,. Kcrala
6. Madhya Pradesh

9
16

7. Madras .

IS

S. Maharubtra

19

9. Mysore

12

10. Orissa

10

u. Punjab
12. Raiasthan

II

10

J 3.

3~

Uttar Pradesh .

16

14. West Bengal

..

15. Jammu and Kuhmir
16. Delhi

3

17. Himachal Pradcsb

2'

IS. Maaipur

I

19. Triplra .

----

I

TOTAL

224
-..

--~-


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

funher to amend the Constitution of India.

The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the
consideration of the Bill.

M.N.KAUL,
Secretary.

(Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri,

Minister of Home Affairs.)

