BUI No. 29 of It56•

.

THE CONSTITUTION (NINTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956

(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA)

it

THE CONSTITUTION' (NINTH AMENDMENT)
"

BILL,'i956

•• 1

(As INTRODUCED IIN LOK SABHA)

...

'A '

BILL

further to amend, the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninth Amend- Short titl.:
mt!nt) Act, 1956.
and
commencement.

5

'j

(2) It shall come into force o~ the ist day of October, 1956.

~.' (~) In art~cle 1 of.t~ ·Constitlltion,.,...- ,
.

.• •

.'

.

I

.

Amendment
of article I

,

,(a) for clause (2), the fo~~wing clause shall be substituted, ~edufe~8t
namely:.
I'

10

"(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as
specified in the First, Schedule" and

• '!OJ

. (b) in clause (3), for sub-clause (b), the following sub:clause
shall be substituted, namely:-

"(b) the Union
Schedule; and",

territories

specified

in

the First

~

(2) For the First Schedule to the Constitution,
Schedule shall be substituted, namely:-

the following

"FIRST SCHEDULE
[Articles I and 4 ]

I. THE STATES
Name
I.

Andhra-Te1angana

2.

Assam

3

Bihar

4.

Gujarat

5.

Kerala

6.

Madhya Pradesh .

7.

Madras

8.

Mabarashtra

I

Territoriss

5

The territories specified in sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the Andhra State Act,
1953 and the territories specified in subsection (1) of section 3 of the States 10
Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were
comprised in the Province of Assam, the
Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, IS
but excluding the territories specified in
the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of·
Boundaries) Act, 1951.
The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were 20
either
comprised in the Province of
Bihar or were being administered as if they
formed part of that Province.
The territories specified in sub-section (1)
of section 10 of the States Reorganisation 2S
Act, 1956.
• The territories specified in sub-section (1)
of section 5 of the States Reorganisation
Act, 1956.
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of 30
section I I of the States Reorganisation
Act, 1956.
The territories which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
were either comprised in the Province of 3.5
Madras or were being administered as if
they formed part of that Province and the
territories specified in section 4 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but excluding the territories specified in sub- 40
section (1) of section 3 and sub-section (1)
of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, I9~3
and - the territories specified in clause (b)
of sub-set..1:ion (1) of section 5, section 6
and clause Cd) of sub-section (1) of section 45
7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The territories specified in sub-section (.1)
of section 9 of the States Reorganisation
, Act, 1956.

.'\

Tsmtories

Nan.

9. Mysore

fne territories specified in sub-section (1) of
section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act,
195 6.
The territories which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
were either comprised in the Province
of Orissa or were being administered as
if they formed part of that Province.

S 10. Orissa

10 II.
12.

IS

Punjab
Rajasthan

The territories specified in section 13 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
.

The territories specified in section 12 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The territories which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
were either comprised in the Province
known as the United Provinces or were
being administered as if they formed part
of that Province.

13. Uttar Prades,h

20 14.

West Bengal

2S
IS.

Jammu and Kashmir

30

•

The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were
either comprised in the Province of West
fiengal or were being administered as if
they formed part of that Province and the
territory of Chandernagore as defined in
clause (0) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954.
The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
comprised in the Indian State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES

Nom.
I.

Bombay

2.

Delhi

3S

40 3. Himachal Pradesh

4S

Extent
. - The territory specified in section 8 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's
Province of Delhi.
The territories which immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution
were being administered as if they were
Chief Commissioners' Provinces under
the names of Himachal Pradesh and
Bilaspur.

4

Name

Ezttmt

4.

Manipur

The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
being administered as if it were a Chief
Commissioner's Province under the name 5
of Manipur.

5.

Tripura

The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
being administered as if it were a Chief
Commissioner's Province under the name 10
of Tripura.
.

6.

The Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.

The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's
Province of the Andaman and Nicobar IS
Islands.

7· The Laccadive, Minicoy The territory specified in 'section 6 of the
and Amindivi Islands.
States Reorganisation Act, 1956."
Amendment
of article 80
and Fourth
Schedule.

3. (1) In article 80 of the Constitution,(a) in sub-clause (I» of clause (1), after the word "States", 20
the words "and of the Union territories" shall be added;
(I» in clause (2), after the wotds "of the States", the words
"and of the Union territories" shall be inserted;
(c) in clause (4), the words and letters "specified in Part
A or Part B of the First Schedule" shall be omitted; and
25
(d) in clause (5), for the words and letter "States specified
in Part C of the First Schedule", the words "Union territories"
shall be substituted.
(2) For the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, the following
Schedule shall be substituted, namely: 30

"FOURTH SCHEDULE

[Articles 4 (1) and 80(2) ]
Allocation of seats In the Council of States

To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of
1he following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats 35
specified in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that
Union territory, as the case may be.
TABLE
1. Andhra-Telangana, ,
2. Assam

18
7

40

3. Bihar

;

to

IS

23

4. Gujarat
5. Kerala
6. Madhya Pradesh
7. Madras
8.Maharashtra
9. Mysore
10. Orissa
11. Punjab
12. Rajasthan
13. Uttar Pradesh
14. West Bengal
15. Jammu and Kashmir
16. Bombay
17. Delhi
18. Himachal Pradesh
19. Manipur
20. Tripura

11

9
16

17
17
12
10

11
10
34
15
4
3
2

1
1

1
TOTAL

20

222"

4. For articles 81 and 82 of the Constitution, the following articles Substitutio~
't t d
I .
of
h
8 all b e su b stl u e , name y . .
clesnew
for artaarticles
and

82.

81

"81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House Composition
of the People shall consist ofof the House

25

(a) not more than five hundred members chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the States,
and

(b) not more than twenty members to represent the
Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may
by law provide.

• 30

(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of
seats in the House of the People in such manner that the
ratio between that number and the population of the State
is, so far as practicable, the same for all States'; and

of the
People.

g
(b) each State shall be divided into territoriai constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each cOllStituency and the number of seats allotted
to it is, so far as practicable, the ·same throughout the State.
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which S
the relevant figures have been published.
1tead;ust-

ment after
each census.

82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of
seats in the House of the People to the States and the division
of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted 10
by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by
law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People until the dissolution of the
IS
then existing House.".

5. In article 131 of the ConstitUtion, for the proviso, the following
ofarncle 131. proviso shall be substituted. namely:"Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a
dispute arising out of an~ treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been 20
entered into or executed before the commencement of this
Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement or
which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to
such a dispute.".

Amen!'meat

6. To article 153 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall 2S
of article be added, namely:IS3·
"Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the
aPROintment .of the same person as Governor for two or more
States.".
Amendment,

7. (1) In clause (1) of article 168 of the Constitution, in sub- 30
clause
(a), the word "Bombay" shall be omitted and after the word
168.
"Madras", the word "Mysore" shall be inserted.
(2) In the said sub-clause, as from such date as the President may,
by public notification appoint, after the word "Bihar", the words
3S
"Madhya Pradesh" shall be inserted.
Substitution
8. For article 170 of the Constitution, the following article shall
of new arti- be substituted, namely:de {or article 170.
"170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative
Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five
Composition
of the Lcgishundied, and not less than sixty, members chosen by direct. 40
lative
election from territorial constituencies in the State.
Assemblies.
Amendment
of

article

S

1
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be
divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the
ratio between the popule.if;ion of each constituency and the
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as Nacticable, be the
same throughout the States.
EzpZanation.-In this clause, the expression "population"
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census
of which the relevant, figures have been published.

10

IS

(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total numbeJ
of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State -into territorial constituencie~ shall be
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as ParHa
ment may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the
then existing Assembly."
9. In clause (1) of article 171 of the Constitution, for the word ~end:ti~!
"one-fourth", the word "one-third" shall be substituted.
171.

10. In article 216 of the Constitution, .. the proviso shall be l\J11endmcnt
of
article
20 omitted.
216.
11. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words ~~d.m~l
".hall hold office until he attains the age of sixty years", the follow- ~11.· artl e
ing words and figures shall be su~stituted, namely:2S

"shall hold office, in the caSe of an additional or acting
Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he
attains the age of sixty years".
12. For article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall Substitution
·
d , name Iy..
of new article
be sub sbtute
for
article
220-

"220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitu- Restriction
30 tion, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court 'shall ~P~1co
plead or Eoct in any court or before any authority in India except a ~n~t
the Supreme Court and the other High Courts....
Judge.
13. In article 222 of the Constitution,(a) in clause (1), the words "within the territory of Ind~a"
35 shall be omitted; and
.
(b) clause (2) shall be Qmitted•.

Amendment
of article 2220

.

8

Substitution
.
of new~cle
14. For artIcle 224 of the Constitution, the following article shall
~~. article be substituted, namely:Appointment
of additional
and
ac:tina
JudICs.

"224. (11 If hy reason of any temporary increase in the
business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein. it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of S
that Court should be for the time being increased, the President
may appoint duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of
the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may
. specify.
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief IC'
Justice is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable
to perform the duties of his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, the President may appoint a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent
Judge has resumed his duties.".
IS

15. For articles 230, 231 and 232 of the Constitution, the follo\';~
cles for arti- ing articles shall be substituted, namely:SfUhstituti0~
new arti-

o

c:1es 230, 231

and 232.
E::tension of
jurisdic:tion
of High
Couns to
Union territories.

Establishment of a

common

High Court
for two or
more States.

"230. (1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of
a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court
from, any Union territory.
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction
in relation to a Union territory,(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as
empowering the Legislature of the State to increase, restrict
or abolish that jurisdiction; and
2S
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in
relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts
in that territory, be construed as a reference to the
President.
231. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preced- 30
ing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish
a common High Court for two or more 'Stales or for two or more
States and a Union terntory.

(2) In relation to any such High Court,(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the 35

State shall be construed as a reference to the Governors
of all the States -in relation to which the High Court
exercises jurisdiction';

9

5

(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in
relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate coutts
be construed as a reference to the Governor of the State in
which the sl1bordinat~ courts are situate; and
•
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State
shall be construed as a reference to the State in which the
High Court has its principal seat:

.

)0

Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the references in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor,
Public Service Commission, Legislature and Consolidated
Fund of the State shall be construed respectively as references to the President. Union Public Service Commission,
Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.".
16. In Part VITI, of the Constitution.-

15

20

25

35

40

(a) for the heading "THE STATES IN PART C OF THE
FIRST SCHEDULE", the heading "THE UNION TERRITORIES" .shall be substituted; and
(b) for articles 239 and 240, the following articles shall be
substituted, namely:-

Amendment
of PartVIII.

"239. Every Union telTitory shall be administrated by ~dmini.tra­
the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through t°r!ilO~
a Chief Commissioner or other authority to be appointed by territolics.
him:
Provided that the President. may by regulation made
under article 240 constitute for any· such territory a council
of advisers to the Chief Commissioner or other authority
with sUch functions as may be specified ill the regulation.
240. The President may make regulations for the peace Pow~r of
and good government of any Union territory and any regu- :::::~d:e~~_
lation so made may repeal or amend any 'law made by Par- ti"~ for .
liament or any existing law which is for the time being ~~~~ ternapplicable to any such territory and, when promulgated by
the President shall have the same force and effect as an Act
of Parliament which applies to such territory.".
17. After article 258 of the Constitution,
shall be inserted, namely:-

the following article Insertion of
new article

258A.

"258A. Notwithstandin.g anything in this Constitution, the Power of
Governor of a State may, with the consent of the Government ~~e e~~~~~~
of India entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that functions to
Govern~ent or to its officers functions in relation to any matter the Union.
to which the executive power of the State extends.".

10

Insertion of
new article
2C}OA.

Annual payment to the

J::::!~:e
Board.

18. After article 290 of the Constitution, the following article
shall be inserted, namely:•

"290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees
shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of
the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore Devaswom 5
Board.".
•

Substitution.
19. For article 298 of the Constitution,
of new anlde for article shall be substituted, namely:298:
Power to

carryon

trade

etc.

the following article

"298. The executive power of the Union and of each State
shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business and 10
to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the
making ·of contracts for any purpese:
Provided that(a) the said executive power of the lJ'nion shall, in so
far as such, trade or business or such purpose is not one I 5
with respect to which Parliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the State; and

(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so
far as such trade or business or such purpose is not one
with respect to which the State Legislature may make 20
laws. be subject to legislation by Parliament.".
Insertion of
article

IICW

3SoA.

Faci1ities for
iDstruction
in mothertonauc: at
primary

sraac.

20. After article 350 of the Constitution, the following article
shall' be inserted, namely:"350A. It shall be the endeavour of every State and of
every local authority within the State to provide adequate 2S
facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary
stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minorit}
groups; and the President may issue such directions to any
State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the
30
provision of such facilities.",

'!1. For article 371 of the
o"new~dc shall be substituted namely:for anlde
'

Substitution
371.

Special

proviaiclll
witb respect
to die S"tatca

of Andbra-

Telanpna

and. Punjab.

Constitution, the following article

"371. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, . the
President may, by order mllde with respect to the State of
Andhra-Telangana or Punjab. provide for the constitution and 35
functions of regional committees of the Legislative Assembly
of the State, for the modifications to be made in the rules of
busines~ of the Government' and in the rules of procedure of the

II

Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special responsibilityof the Governor in order to securp the proper functioning
of the regional committees.".
~2. In the ~econd Schedule

5

to the Constitution,-

AmendmeDt
of the Second

(a) in the heading of Part 0, the words and letter "in Schedule.
States in Part A of the First Schedule" shall he omitted; and
(b) in paragraph 10,(i) for sub-paragraph (1). the following sub-para~aph
shall be substituted, namely:-

JO

I5

(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of High
Courts, in respect of time spent on actual service.
salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to
sty,-

A. In the case of any High Court other than the High Court
of Kerala, Mysore or RajasthanRs.

The Chief Justice
Any other Judge
B. In the case of the High Courts o· Kcrdla, l"lysore or Rajasthan20

25

30

The Chief Justice

3,')00

Any other Judge

2,500 :

•
Provided that if a Judge of any such High Court
at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension
(other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of
any previous service under the Government of India
or any of its predecessor Governments or under the
Government of a State or any of iis predecessor
Governments, his salary in respect of service in the
High Court shall be reduced by the amount of that
pension. ";

. ""

(ii) sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) shall be omitted.
(I

!!3 In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, entry 33 of the ModificBtiOll,
trnion List and entry 36 of the State List shall be omitted and for ~ cL!sries
entry 42 of the Concurrent List, the following entrv shall be sub- ~u:, to
35 stituted , namely:
- .
.
8it~~ ,a~ n;•
qW81tJOnang

t:

t!C:ui:

"42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property."

of rroperty.

12

U. In each of the following provwQns of the Constitution,

Amendment

of~ pro- namely:VISIons rda-

tingto.aDci~t

and rustoncal
monuments,
etc..

(i) entry 67 of the Union List
(ii) entry 12 of the State List,

'

I, iii) entry 40 of the Concurrent List, and
liv) article 49,

5

for the words "declared by Parliament by law", the words "declared
by or under law made by Parliament" shall be substituted.
~~m::~f
2i. In he Seventh Schedule to the CoastitutiQn. in entry 24 of
State List.
the State List, for the word and figures "entry 52", the words and 10
figures "entries 7 and 52" shall be substituted.
26. (1) The consequential and minor amendments and' repeals
~s .directed in the Schedule shall be made in the Constitution and in the
and repeals Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order, No. VIII, made under
and savings. article 392 of the Constitution.

Consequential

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of article 243 of the Constitution
by the said Schedule, all regulations made by the President under
bat article and in force immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority_

IS

20

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 26)
CoNSEQUENTIAL AND MINOR AMENDMENTS AND

CONSTIroTIOH

REPEALS IN THE

•

Article 3.--In the proviso, omit "specified in Part A Or Part B 2S
.of the First Schedule".
Article 31A.-In sub-clause (a) of clause (2), for "Travancore-

Cochin" substitute "Kerala".

Article 58.-In the Explanation, omit "or Rajpramukh or Uparaj30
pramukh".
ArtiC'le 66.-In the E.rptanati~n, omit "or Rajpramukh or
U parajpramukh'-.
•I\·rticle 72.-In claus~ (3), omit "or Rajpramukh".
A,·ticle 73.-In the proviso to clause (1), omit "specifi~ in Part
A or Part B of the First Schedule".
3S

Article 101.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A ~r Part B
of the First Schedule", and for usuch a State" substitute "a State".

13
Article 112.-In sub-clause (d) (iii) of clause (3), for "a Province
corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule",
substitute "a Governor's Province of the Pominion of India".

Article 151.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh".
Part VI.-In the heading, omit "IN PART A OF THE FIRST
SCImDULE".

5

Article 152.-For "means a State specified in Part A of the First
, Schedule" substitute "does not include the State of Jammu and
Kashmir".
10

Article 20B.-Omit clause (2) and renumber clause (3) as clause

(2).

Article ~09.-omit "or with any rule or standing order having
effect in relation to the Legislature of the State under clause (2) of
that article".
15

Article 214.-Omit "(1)" and clauses (2) and (3).
Article 219.-0mit "in a State".
Article 229.-In the proviso to clause (1) and in the proviso to
clause (2), oInit "in which the High Court has its principal seat".

Omit Part VII.
20

Article 241.-(a) In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of
the First Schedule", substitute "Union territory", and far "such
State", substitute "such territory".
(b) For clauses (3) and (4), substitute-

25

30

3S

"(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and -to the

of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by
virtue at powers conferred on that Legislature by or under this
Constitution, every High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Sixth
Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territor1 shall
continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory
after such commencement.
provision~

(4) Nothing in this article derogates from, the power of
Parliament to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court
for a State to, or from, any Union territory or part thereof.".
Omit article 242.
Omit Part IX.

Article 244.-Qmit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First
Schedule".

14
Article 246.-In clauses (2) and (3), omit "specified in Part A or
Part B of the First Schedule" and in clause (4), for "in· Part A or
Part B of the First Schedule" substitute "in a State".

Article 254.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B
of the First Schedule".
6
Article 255.-Qmit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First
Schedule".

Omit article 259.
IDtClTtctadon.

Article 264.-For article 264, substitute264. In this Part, 'Finance Commission' means a Finance 10
Commission constituted under article 280.".
Article 267.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 268.-In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of the
First Schedule" substitute "Union. territory".
Article 269.-In clause (2), for "States specified in Part C of the IS
First Schedule" substitute "Union territories".
Article 270.-In clauses (2) and (3), for "States specified in Part
C of the First Schedule" substitute "Union territories".
Omit article 278.
Article 280.-In clause (3), omit sub-claus'e (c) and re-Ietter sub- 20

cla~ (d) as sub-clause (c).

Article 283.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 29I.~it "(1)" and clause (2).
Article 299.-In clause (1), omit "or the Rajpramukh", and in
2S
clause (2), omit "nor the Rajpramukh".
Omit article 306.
Article 30B.-For "means a State specified in Part A or Part B
of the First $chedule" substitute "does not include the State of
Jammu and Kashmir".
Article 309.-Dmit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 310.-In clause (1), omit "or, as the case may be, the
Rajpramukh", and in clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or the
Rajpramukh".
Article 3I1.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh".

30

15

ArticZe 315.-ln clause (4), omit "or Rajapramllkh".
ArticZe 316.-ln clauses (1) and (2), omit "or Rajpramukh".
ArticZe 317.-1n clause (2), omit "or Raj pramukh ".
Article 318.-Omit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 320.-10 clause (3), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or Rajpramukh, as the case may 'be", and in clause (5), omit "or Rajpramukh".

5

Article 323.-ln clause (2), omit
Rajpramukh, as the case may be".
10

"or Rajpramukh"

and "or

Article 324.-ln clause (6), omit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 332.-ln clause (1), omit "specified in Part A or Part B
of the First Schedule".
Article 333.-Omit "or Rajpramukh".

Ar.ticle 337.-0mit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First
15 Schedule".
Article 339.-In clause (1), omit "specified in Part A and Part
B of the First Schedule" and in clause (2), for "any such State"
substitute "a State".
Article 341.-ln clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Union
ao territory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the_Fiist Schedule",
omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State~' insert "or Union
teITitory, as the case may be".
Article 342.-ln clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Union
territory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule",
2$ omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State" insert "or Union
territory, as the case may be"_
Article 348.-Omit "or Rajpramukh".
Article 356.-ln clause (1), omit "or
Rajpramukh, as the case may be".
30

Rajpramukh"

and "or

Article 361.-1n clauses (2), (3) and (4), omit "or ~jpramukh"
and in clause (4), omit "or the Rajpramukh".
Article 366.-0mit clause (21), Iil,ld for clause (30), substitute"(30) 'Union territory' means any Union territory specified

35

in the First Schedule and includes an,. other teITitory comprised
within the territory of Iridia but not specified in that Schedule".

16

Article 367.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B
of the First Schedule" and "or Rajpramukh".
Article 368.-0mit "specified in Parts A and B of the First
Schedule" .
Omit articles 379 to 391, both i'nclurive.

Second Schedule.-(a) In the heading of Part A and in paragraph
1, omit "specified in Part A of the First Schedule";
(b) in paragraph 2, omit "so specified";
(c) in paragraph 3, for "such States" substitute "the States";
(d) in the heading of Part B, omit "in Part A and Part B of the 10
First Schedule";
(e) in paragraph 6, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the
First Schedule";

(f) in the heading of Part C, omit "of a State in Part A of the
First Schedule", and for "any such State" substitute "a State"; and IS
(g) in paragraph 8, omit "of a State specified in Part -A of the
First Schedule", and for "such State" substitute "a State".

Fifth Schedule.-(a) In paragraph 1, omit "means a State specified in Part A' or Part B of the First Schedule but";
(b) in paragraph 3, omit "or Rajpramukh";
(c) in paragraph 4, in sub-paragraph l2), omit "or Rajpramukh, as
the case may be" and in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or Rajpramukh".
(d) in paragraph 5, in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), omit "or
Rajpramukh, as the case may be", in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or
Rajpramukh" and in sub-paragraph (5), omit "or the Rajpramukh". 2$
S~venth Schedule.-In List 1,-

(a) in entry 32, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the
First Schedule"; and

(b) for entry 79, substitute,"79. Extension of. the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and 30
exclusion of the jurisdictiop of a High Court from, any Union
territory. "

17
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS

IN

THE

CONSTITUTION

(REMOVAL OF

DIFFICULTIES) ORDER No. VIII

in the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. VIII, for
sub-paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of paragraph 2, substituteS
"(1) In article 81,(a) in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), after the words
"Union territories", the words, letter and figures "and the
tribal areas specified in Part B of the Table appended to
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule" shall be inserted; and
10

15

(b) to clause (2), the following proviso shall be added
namely:-

"Provided that the constituencies into which the
State of Assam is divided shall not comprise the tribal
areas specified in Part B of the Table appended to
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule."
(2) In clause (2) of article 170, after the words "throughout
the State", the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-

ao

"Provided that the constituencies into which the State
of Assam Is divided shall not comprise the tribal areas specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the
Sixth Schedule!'."

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In order to implement the scheme of States reorganisation, it
is necessary to make numerous amendments in the Constitution

with effect from the 1st October, 1956. This Bill seeks to make
these amendments and also some other amendments to certain
provisions of the Constitution relating to the High Courts and High
Court Judges, the executive power of the Union and the States,
and a few entries in the legislative lists. The reasons for making
the amendments are indicated below.
Clause 2.-The reorganisation scheme involves not only the
establishment of new States and alterations in the arEa and boundaries of the existing States, but also the abolition of the three categOries of States (Put A, Part B and Part C States) and the classification of certain areas as Union territories. Article 1 has to be
suitably amended for this purpose and the First Schedule completely
revised.

Clause 3.-The amendments proposed in article 80 are formal
and consequential. The territorial changes and the formation of
new States and Union territories as proposed in Part II of the
States Reorganisation Bill, 1956, involve a complete revision of the
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution by which the seats in the
Council of States are allocated to the existing States. The present
allocation is made on the basis of the population of each State as
ascertained at the census of 1941 and the number of seats allotted
.to each Part A and Part B State is according to the formula, one
seat per million for the first five millions and one seat for every
addi tional two millions or part thereof exceeding one million. It
is proposed to revise the allocation of seats on the basis of the
latest census figures, but according to the same formula as before.
Clause 4.-The abolition of Part C States as such and the estab·
lishment of Union territories make extensive amendment of articles
81 and 82 inevitable. The provision in article 81 (1) (b) that "too
States shall be divided, grouped or formed into territorial constituencies" will no longer be appropriate, since after reorganisation
.each of the States will be large enough to be divided into a number
of constituencies and will not permit of being grouped together
with other States for this purpose or being "formed" into a single
territorial constituency. Clause (2) of article 81 .and article 82
will require to be combined and revised in order to make suitable
provision for Union territories. Instead of amending the articles
18

19

piecemeal, it is proposed to revise and simplify them. Incidentally,
it is proposed in clause (1) (b) of the reviaed article 81 to fix a
maximum for the total number of representatives that may be
assigned to the Union territories by Parliament.

Clause 5.-The proposed revision of the proviso to article 131 is
consequential on the disappearance of Part B States as such. The
.two parts of the existing proviso have been combined.
Clause B.-Article 153 provides that there shall be a Governor
,for each State. Since it may be desirable in certain circumstances
to appoint a Governor for two or more States, it is proposed to add
a proviso to this article to remove any possib1e technical bar to such
an appointment.
Clause 7.-Sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 168 provides
for bi-cameral legislatures in certain States. It is proposed that,
among the reorganised States, Punjab and Mysore should continue
to have such a legislature, and that the enlarged Madhya Pradesh
should also be provided with one. Since the constitution of a
Legislative Council for Madhya Pradesh will necessarily take time,
it is proposed to bring the relevant amendment of article 168 (1) (a)
into force from a future date by means of a public notification of
the President.
Clause 8.-This seeks to revise article 170 mainly with a view to
bringing it into line with articles 81 and 82 as revised by clause 4.
Clause 9.-Under clause (1) of article 171, the maximum strength
of the Legislative Council of a State is fixed at one-fourth of the
strength of the Legislative Assembly of that State. Although in
the larger States, like Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, this maximum is
adequate, it leads to Clifficulties in the case of the smaller' States.
It is, therefore, proposed to alter the maximum to one-third of the
strength of the Legislative Assembly.
Clause 10.-Article 216 empowers the President to appoint to a
High Court as many judges as he may from time to time deem it
necessary and also to fix the maximum number of judges for each
High Court by a separa~ order. The proviso is of little significance
from the practical point of 'view. since the order fixing the maximum
may be changed by the' President whenever necessary. The appointment of additional and acting judges for which providon is sought
to be made in clause 14 will also involve either frequent modifications in the order or a fiXation of the maximum number at a high
figure. It is, therefore, proposed to omit the proviso to article 216.
Clause n.-The amendment of clause (1) of article 2\7 proposed
in this clause is consequential on the proposal to provide for the
appointment of additional and acting judgleS for limited peripds.

20

Clause 12.-An important factor affecting the selection of High
Court judges from the bar is the total prohibition contained in
article 220 on practice after their retirement from the bench. It
is proposed to revise the article so as to relax this complete ban
and permit a retired judge to practise in the Supreme Court and in
any High Court other than the one in which he was a permanent
judge.
'
Clause 13.-Article 222 empowers the President to transfer'
judges from one High Court to another. Clause (2) of this article
goes on to provide that when a judge is so transferred he shall be
entltled to receive in addition to his salSifY a compensatory allow· .
ance. It is felt that there is no real justification for granting such
an allowance and it is accordingly proposed to omit clause (2).
Clause H.-The provision in slfticle 224 for recalling retired
judges to function on the bench of a High Court for short periods
has been found to be neither adequate nor satisfactory. It is, therefore, proposed to replace this article by a provision for the appointment of additional judges to clear off arrears and for the appointment of acting judges in temporary vacancies.
Clause 15.-It is proposed to revise and simplify articles 230, 231
and 232 having regard to the constitutional position of States and
Union territories after reorganisation. While under artIcle 214
there will normally be a separate High Court for each State, power
will be required to establish commol! High Courts for two or more
States. Power will also be required to extend the jurisdiction of
a High Court to a Union territory, wherever nece6S8ry, and to
exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from such territory. The
revised articles 230 and 231 are designed to make these provisions.
Clause 16.-Part VIII of the Constitution provides for the administration of Part C States and Part IX for the administration
of Part D territories. It is proposed to amend Part VIll to provide
for the administration of Union territories and to repeal Part IX.
Clause 17.-While the President is empowered by article 258 (1)
to entrust Union functions to a State Government or its officers,
there is no corresponding provision enabling the Governor of a
State to entrust State functions to the Central Government or its
officers. This lacuna has been found to be of practical consequence
in connection with the execution of certain development projects in
the States. It is proposed to fill the lacuna by a new articLe 258A.
Clause 18.- Article VIII of the Covenant entered into by the
Rulers of Travancore and Cochin in May, 1949, for the formation of
the United State of Travancore and Cochin provided that Travancore's obligation to contribute annually a sum of Rs. 51 lakhs to

21

the Travancore Devaswom Fund should continue as an obligation
of the United State. This arrangement was confirmed by article
238(10) (iii) of the Constitution. It is proposed that the existing
arrangement should be continued even after the formation of the
new State of Kerala, but the contribution to the Travancore
Devaswom Board from the Consolidated- Fund of that State should,
in view of the transfer of territory from Travancore-Cochin to
Madras, be reduced from Rs. 51 lakhs to Rs. 46·5 lakhs.
Clause 19.-ln this clause it~is proposed to revise and amplify the
scope of article 298, mainly to make it clear that the Union Government, as well as the State Governments, are competent to
carry on any commercial or industrial undertaking, whether or not
it is related to a matter within the legislative competence of the
Union, or, as the case may be, of the State. Similarly, the holding, acquisition and disposal of property and the making of contracts by the Union or a State could be for any purpose without
constitutional impropriety. At the same time, the revised article
provides that this extended executive power of the Union and of
the States will be subject, in the former case, to legislation by the
State, and in the latter case, to legislation by Parliament.
Clause 20.-The new article 350A proposed in this clause is
designed to implement one of the States Reorganisation Commission's important recommendations regarding safeguards for linguistic minorities in the States after reorganisation.
Clause 21.-lt is proposed to replace atticle 371 by another article
making a special provision with respect to the States of Andhra
and Punjab. This article will enable the President to constitute
regional committees of the State Legislative Assembly and secure
their proper functioning by directing suitable modifications to be
made in the rules of business of Government and in the rules of
procedure of the Assembly.
Clause 22.-The High Court of Travancore-Cochin will, as from
the appointed day, become the High Court for the new State of
Kerala and the High Courts of Mysore and Rajasthan will continue,
respectively, as the High Courts for the enlarged "new" States with
the same names. Taking into account the level of income at the
bar and salaries payable to the judicial services in these States, it
is considered that there is no need to increase the salaries payable
to the Judges of the~e High Courts to the level of the other High
Courts. It is proposed to amend sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 10
of the Second Schedule to the Constitution providing for a salary of
B.s. 3,000 to the Chief Justices, and Rs. 2,500 to the other Judges, of
these three High Courts.

•
Sometimes it becomes necessary to appoint a retired district
judge as a judge of a High Court. In the absence of a legal provision for withholding the pension due to such a judge, it has been
the practice to obtain from him an undertaking that he would not
claim the pension for the period for which he serves as a High
Court judge. Since this is ·obviously unsatisfactory, it is proposed
to add a proviso to paragraph 10(1) of the Second Schedule on the
same lines as the proviso to paragraph 9(1) thereof regulating the
salary of a judge of the Supreme Court in similar circumstances.
Sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) of paragraph 10 are no longer
required, since appropriate provision has been made in the High
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954.
Clause 23.-The existence of three entries in the legislative lists
(33 of List I, 36 of List II and 42 of List III) relating to the essentially single subject of acquisition and requisitioning of property
by the Government gives rise to unnecessary technical difficultLas
in legislation. In order to avoid these difficulties and simplify the
constitutional position, it is proposed to omit the entries in the
Union and State List and replace the entry in the Concurrent List
by a comprehensive entry covering the whole subject.
Clause 24.-Entry 67 of the Un!on List refers to ":ancient and
historical monuments and records, and archllwlogical sites and
remains, declared by Parliament by law to be of national importance". A large number of ancient monuments, archeological sites,
etc., have been declared to be of national importance by an Act of
Parliament. It requires another Act of Parliament to make the·
sUghtest alteration in, or addition to, the lists in that Act, which
seems to be an unduly cumbrous procedure. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the entry substituting for the words "declared by
Parliament by law", the words "declared by or under law made by
Parliament". The same amendment is also proposed to be made in
the connected provisions, entry 12 of the State List, entry 40 of the
Concurrent List and article 49.
Clause 25.-Although the Union List has two entries 7 and 52,
relating to industries, the latter alone is referred to in entry 24 of
List II. The omission of entry 7 of List I appears to be due to an
oversight and is sought to be rectified in this clause.

Clause 26 and the Schedule.-Tbese contain the consequential
and minor amendments and repeals proposed to be made in the
Constitution and in the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties)
Order No.· VllI pertaining to the Assam tribal areas.

NEW DEuu;
The 14th April, 1956.

GOVIND BALLABH PANif.

23
ANNEXURE

..

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

•

•

•

PART I

•

THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.

Name and
territory of
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be the States and the Union.

their territories specified in Parts A, Band C of the First Schedule.
(3) The territory of India shall comprise-

(a) the territories of the States;
(b) the territories specified in Part D of the First Schedule;

and

(c) such other territories as may be acquired.

•

•

•

•

•

49. It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every Promotion 01

monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest declared monuments
by Parliament by law to be of national importrnce, from spoliation, pJ.ce-:W- and
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export as the case Obj~ctnal' • of
natto
1Dlmay be.
portance._

...

...

•

•

...

80. (1) The Council of States shall consist of-

•

•

...

••

•

(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States.
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be ftlled
by representatives of' the States' shall be in accordance with the
provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.

•

•

•

•

...

(4) The representatives of each State specified in Part A or
Part B of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall be
elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the
State in accordance with the system of proportional representation
by means of the single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the States specified in Part C of the
First Schedule in the Council of States shall be chosen in such
manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.
...
...
...
...

•

<Ampoeition

of the Coun·
. ell of Scam.

24

81. (1) (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) and of articles
:l::eer~~: 82 and 331, the House of the People shall consist of not more than
five hundred members directly elected by the voters in the States.
Compoaition

(b) For the purpose of sub-clause (4), the
States· shall be
divided, grouped or formed into territorial constituencies and the
number of members to be allotted to each such constituency shall
be so determined as to ensure that there shall be not more than one
member for every 500,000 of the population.
(c) The ratio between the number of members allotted to each
territorial constituency and the population of that constituency as
'ascertained at the last preceding census of which the .relevant
figures have been published shaU, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the territory of India.

(2) The representation in the House of the People of the territories comprised within the territory of India but not included within any State shall be such as Parliament may by law provide.

=

(3) Upon the completion of each census, the representation of
the several territorial constituencies in the House of the People
shall be readjusted by such authority, in such manner and with
effect from such date as Parliament may by law de~rmine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representatioft
in the House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing House.

82. Notwithstanding anything in clause (1) of article 81, ParliaiCPt:e:.
ment may by law provide for the representation in the House of
t"~:nto- orthe ofPeople
of any State specified in Part C of the First Schedule
any territories comprised within the territory of India but
pro-

to

and

1:cter

t

!

of 8~tea
tates.

not included within any State on a basis or in a manner other than
that provided in that clause.

•

•

•

•

•

131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme
Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original
rcme Court. jurisdiction in any dispute-(4) between the Government of India and one or more
States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any
State or
States on one side and one or more other States on the
other; or
. (c) between two or more States,
if and in So far as the dispute involves any question (whether
of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a
legal right depends:
Original
juriadicdoo
ofthcSup-

Provided tRat the said jurisdiction shall not extend ~
(i) a cUspute to which a State specified in

Par~ B of the
First Schedule is a party, if the dispute arises out of any
provision of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement,
sanad or other similar instrument which was entered
into or executed before the commencement of this Constitution and has, Of has been, continued in operation
after IUCh co~encementj

(ii) a dispute to which any State is a party, if the dispute

arises out of any provision of a treaty, agreement, covennant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument
which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend
to such a dft;pute.

•

•

•

•

•

PART VI
THE STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 11.-THE EXECUTIVE

The Governor
153. There shall be a Governor for each ·State.

'"

•

CHAPTER

•

•

III.-THE STATE LEGISLATURE

•

Governor.

of Statca.

General

168. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall Constitution
of Lelialaconsist of the Governor, and
tures in
(a) in the States of Bihar, Bombay, Madras, Punjab, Uttar States.
Pradesh and West Bengal, t}Vo Housesj
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State,
one shall be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the
Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one House. it shall be
known as the Legislative Assembly.
170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative
Assembly of ec-ch. State shall be composed of members chosen by
direct election.
.

.

The representation of each territorial const:tuency in the
Legislative Assembly of a State shall be on the basis of the popu·
lation of that constituency as ascertained at the Irst preceding
census of which the relevant figurteS have beeR published and shall.
save in the case of the autonomous districts of Assam end the con(2)

-'

26
stituency comprising the cantonment and municipality of Shlllong,
be on a scale of not more than one member for every seventy-fl\!t
thousand of the population :
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative
Assembly of a State shall in no case be more than five hundred or
less than sixty.
.
(3) The ratio between the numbe; of members to 'be allotted
to each territorial constituency in a State and the population of
that constituency as ascertained at the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(4) Upon the completion of each census, the representation of
the several territorid constituencies in th~ Legislative Assembly
of each State shan be readjusted by such authority, in such manner
and with effect from such date as Parliament may by la1w determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect represE.'ntation
in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing
Assembly.
Composition
171. (1) The total number of members in the Legislative Council
~~~~~- of a State having such a Council shall not exceed one·fourth of the
cils.
total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that
State:
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative
Council of a State shall in no caSe be less than forty.
...
...
...
*
ConstiMion
'216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such
of High
other
JudgpsFs the President may from 'time to time deem it
Courts.
necessary to appoint:
Provided that the Judges so appointed shall at no time exceed
in number such maximum number as the President mily,- from
time to time, by order fix in relation to that Court.
Appointment
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be e,'ppointed by th.e
~0ftI C:O:c President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation
the office of with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in
H!~~~~ the case of C'ppointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice,
the Chief Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office until he
attains the age of sixty years:

•

..

Prohi~ition ~f

..

•

*

.'

220. No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court

=:::mg ~~ after tHe commencement of this Constitution shall ple£d or act
before any in anv court or before any au.thority within the territory of India.
authority by
•
•
.
(:
'
.~,
t)
(,
Judges.

I

27
Tranafer of
. 222. (1) The Pr.esident may, after consultation with the Chief a .1udge from
Justice of India,' transfer a Judge from one High Court to any C~~l(t Hie
other High Court witbin the territory of India.
another .
. (2) When a Judge is so transferred, he shall, during the period
he serves as a Judge of the. other Court, be entitled to receive in
addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be
determined by P~,r1iament by law and, until so determined, such
compensatory allowance as the President may by order fix.

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Attendance of

. 224. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief retirc:d
Justice of a High Court for any State may at my time, with the ~~~i~~~ ~}
previous consent of the President, request any person who has held ~igh
the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to ourls.
sit and act as £, Judge of the High Court for that State, and every
such person so requested shall, while so sitt:ng and acting, be en·
titled to such allowances as the President may by order determine
and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall
not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require
any such person as. aforesaid to sit and act 'as a Judge ~f that
High Court unless he consents so to do .

•

230. Parliament may by law(a) extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or
(bj exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from,

Extension of
or
exdusion
from
the
jurisdictionof
High Courts.

any Stde specified in the First Schedule other than, or any area
:Qot within, the State in which the High Court has its principal
seat.
231, Where a High Court exercises jurisdiction in relation to Restrictions
al1Y .area outside the State in which it has its principal seat, noth· ~~s t~ ~h;
ing.in this Constitution shall be construedLegislatures
.

(a) as empowering the Legislature of the State in which

of

States

the to. make la~
. , Ise~
t t0 Increase,
'
' t or a b0 I'IS h to
wlth iurisdicrespect
· prmclpa
Court h as ·lts
res t rIc
that jurisdiction'
tion
of a
,
High Court
(b) as empowering the Legislature of a State specified in in ~ .S~te
. A or P art B 0 f t h e F'Irst Sch ed uI
hanng )unlPart
e 'm wh'lCh any diction
outsuch area is situate, to abolish that jurisdiction; or
side
thlt
State,
(e) as preventing the Legislature having power to make laws
in that behalf for any such area. from p~ssing, subject.
to the provisions of clause (b), such laws with respect to
the jurisdiction of the Court in relation to that area as
it would be competent to pass if the principd seat of thp.
Court were in that area,

28
Jntcrprc~

don.

232. Where a High Court exercises jurisdiction in relation to
more than one State specified in the First Schedule or in relaboa
.0 a State and III area Dot forming part of the State(a) references in this Chapter to the Governor

in relation
to the Judges of a High Court shall be construed as re.ferences to the Governor of the State in which the COUrt
has its principal se£Jt:;

(b) the reference to the approval by the Governor of rules,
forms and tables for subordinate COurts shall be construed as a reference to the approval thereof by the
Governor or the Rajpn:mukh of the State in which the
subordinate court is situate, or if it is situate in an area
not forming part of any State specified in Part A or
Part B of the First Schedule, by the President; and
(c) references to the Consolidated Fund of the State shall be

construed as references to the Consolidated Fund of the
State in which the Court has its principal seat.

PART VDI

•

THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
Administra-

239. (1) Subject to the other

provisions of this

Part, a State

c c:r

President acting, to such extent ~s he thinks

fit, through a

~~

b! Part specified in Part C of the First Schedule shall be administered by

FdirBlt

Schc-. Chief Commissioner or a Lieutenant-Governor to be appointed by

uc.

the the

him or through the Government of a neighbouring State:

Provided that the Prealdent shall not act
ernment of a neighbouring State 88IVe after-

through the Gov-

(a) consulting the Government concerned; and
(b) ascertaining in such manner as the President considers

most appropriate the views of the people of tlie State to
be so administered.
.

(2) In this article, references to EJ State shall include references
to a part of a State.
Creation or
240. (1) Parliament may by law create or continue for any
~tin= State specified in Part C of the First Schedule md administered
l.eIiatatare. through a Chief Commissioner or Lieutenant-Governoror Council

~~ M1~~~~

(a) a body, whethe~ nominated, elected or partly nom:nated

and partly elected, to function as a Legisldure for the
State; or

29

(b) a Council of Advisers or Ministers, or both with such
constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may
be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law £5 is referred to in clause (1) shall not be
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes
of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which
amends or has the effect of amending the Constitution .

•

•

•

•

•

298. (1) The executive power of the Union and of each State Power to
shall extend, subject to any law made~ by the appropriate Legis- ~=Y'
lature, to the grant, sale, disposition or mortgage of any property
held for the purposes of the Union or of such StElte, as the case
may be, and to the purchase or acquisition of property for those
purposes respectively, and to the making of contracts.
(2) All property acquired for the purposes of the Union or of

a State shall vest in the Union or in such State, as the CElSe may
be.

371. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, during a proVISIons
Tem'p~rary
period of ten years from the commencement thereof, or during with respec
such longer or shorter period as Parl;ament may by IEIW provide ~art Sta~s ~
in respect of any State, the Government of every State specified in the
Firs
Part B of the First Schedule shall be under the general control of, Schedule.
and comply with such particular directions, if £Illy, as may from
time to time be given by, the President:
Provided that the President may by order direct that the provision!:' of this article shall not apply to any State specified in the
order.

..

•

•

•

FIRST SCHEDULE

•

(Articles 1, 4 and 391)
The States and the territories of India
Names of States
1. Andhra

2. Assam
3. Bihar
4. Bombay
5. Madhya Pradesh

PART A
Names of corresponding Provinces
Assam
Bihar
Bombay
The Central Provinces
and Berar

30
N ames of States

Names of corresponding Provinces

6. Madras
7. Orissa
8. Punjab
9. Uttar Pradesh
10. West Bengal.

Madras
Orissa
East Punjab
The United Provinces
West Bengal
TERRITORIES OF STATES

..

The territory of the State of Andhra shall comprise the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State
Act, 1953.
The territory of the State of Assam shall comprise the territories
which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution
were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and
the Assam Tribal Areas but shall not include the territories
specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries)
Act, 1951.
The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall
comprise the territories which immed)ately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the corresponding province and the territories which, by virtue of an order made under
section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935, were immediately before such commencement being administered as if they formed
part of that Province and in the case of the State of West Bengal
shall also comprise the territory of Chandernagore as defined in
clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954,
but in the case of the State of Madras shall not include the
territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-section
(1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953.
PART B
NAMES OF STA'lT.8

1. Hyderabad.

2. Jammu and Kashmir,
3. Madhya Bharat.

4. Mysore.

Jf

5. Patiala and East Punjab States Union.

6. Rajasthan.
7. Saurashtra.
8. Travancore-Cochin.

TERRITORIES OF STATES

The territory of each of the States in this Part shall comprise
the territory which, immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution, was comprised iIlt or administered by the Government of, the corresponding Indian State, and in the case of the
State of Madhya Bharat, shall also comprise the territory which,
immediately before such commencement, was comprtsed in the
Chief Commissioner's Province of Panth Piploda and in the case
of the State of Mysore shall also comprise the territory specified
in sub~ection (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953.
PART C
NAMES OF STATES

1. Ajmer.
2. Bhopal.
3. Coorg.
4. Delhi.
5. Himachal Pradesh.
6. Kutch.
7. Manipur.
8. Tripura.
9. Vidhya Pradesh.
TERRITORIES OF STATES

The territory of each of the States of Ajmer, Coorg and Delhi
shall comprise the territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioners' Provinces of Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and Delhi, respectively.
The territory of the State of Himachal Pradesh shall comprise
the territories which immediately before the commencement of the
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954, were comprised in the States of Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh.

3~

The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall
comprise the territories which, by virtue of an order made under
section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935, were imme-'
'(iiately before the commencement of this Constitution being ad'ministered as if they were a Chief Commissioner's Province of the
:same name.
PARTD

'the Ande.man and ~icobar Islands.
SECOND SCHEDULE

[Articles 59(3), 65(3), 75(6), 97, 125, 148(3), 158(3),164(5),186
and 221.]:
PART Ai
PROVISIONS AS TO THE PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNORS OF
SPECIFIED IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE

STATES

PART D
PROVISIONS AS TO THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT AND OF THE
HIGH COURTS IN STATES IN, PART A OF THE FIRST ScHEDULE

10. (1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the High Court of
each State specified in Part A of the First Schedule, in respect of
time spent on actual service, salary SIt the following rates per
mensem, that is to say:The Chief Justice

4,000 rupees

Any other Judge

3,500 rupees

(3) Every Judge of a High Court shall receive such reasonable
allowances to reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on
duty within the territory of India and shall be afforded such reasonable facilities in connection with travelling as the President may
from time to time prescribe,
(4) The rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave
allowances)md pension of the Judges of the High Court of any
State shall be governed by the provisions which, immediately before the commencement of .this Constitution, were appl~cable to the
.J udges of the High Court in the corresponding Province.

•

•

•

•

•

33
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1), 80(2) and 391]
Allocation of seats in the Council of States
To each State or group of States specified in the first column
of the table of seats appended to this Schedule there shall be
allotted the number of seats specified in the second column of the
said table opposite to that State of group of States, as the case
may be.
TABLE OF SEATS
THE COUNCIL OF STATES
Representatives of States specified in Part A of the First Schedule
I

2

States

Total

Andhra
Assam
Bihar
Bombay
Madhya Pradesh
Madras
Orissa
•
8 Punjab
9· Uttar Pradesh
10. West Bengal

12
6
21
17
12
18
9

I.

2.
3·
4·
5·
6.
7·

.

.

Seats

8
31

14

148

TOTAL

. Representatives of States specified in Part B of the First Schedule

---

2
Total Seats

States

Hyderabad
.
Jammu and Kashmir
Madhya Bharat
Mysore.
•
.
Patiala and East Punjab
States Union
6. Rajasthan
7· Saurashtra
8. Travancore ·Cochin

II

I.

4
6
6

2.
3·
4·
5·

---

TOTAL

..

-----------_._-.0'

•

3
9
4
6

49

34
Representatives of States spedfted in Part C of the First Schedule

States and Groups of States
I.

2.

3·
4·

S·

6,

7·

8.
9·

Total Seats

}

Ajmer
Coorg
Bhopal
Himachal Pradesh
Delhi
"
Kutch
Manipur
Tripura
Vindhya Pradesh

I
I
I

·1
I

}

4

TOTAL

10

TOTAL OF J\L.L SEATS

•

•

207

•

•

•

•

•

.

•

..

•

•

•

•

.

•

SEVENTH SCHEDULE

l Article 246]

List I-Union List

•

•

•

•

.

.

•

•

•

.

•

33. Acquisition or requisitioning of property for the purposes of
the Union.
List II-State List

36, Acquisition or requisitioning of property. except for the
purposes of the Union. subject to the provisions of entry 42 of List
III.
I

•

List Ill-Concurrent List

.

.

42. Principles on which comPensation for property acquired or
requisitioned for the purposes of the Union or of a State or for
any other'public purpose is to' be determined. £'lld the form and
the manner jn which such compensation is to be given.
c

~3

List I-UDion List

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains. declared by Psll"liament by law to be of
national importance.
•

List D-State List

•

•

•

•

•

•

12. Libraries. museums and other similar institutions controlled
or financed by the State; ~'llcient and historical monuments and
records other than those declared by Parliament by law to be of
national importance.
List m-Concurrent List
40. Archaeological sites and remc:ins other than those declared
by Parliament by law ,to be of national importance.

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

*

•

*

•

•
List I-Union List
List II-State List

24. Industries subject to the provisions of entry 52 of List I.

•

THE CONSTITUTION (REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES) ORDER
NO. VIII
In exercise of. the powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 392
of the Constitution of India, the President is pleased to make the
following Order, namely:1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Removal of
Difficulties) Order No. VIII.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. For the period during which the .tribe11 areas specified in Part
B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to
the Constitution or any parts thereof are administered by the President by virtue of sub-paragr2ph (2) of paragraph 18 of the said

36

Schedule, the Constitution of India shall have effect subject to the
following adaptations: .
(1) In article 81,-

(a) .to sub-clause (b) of clause (1), ~he following proviso shall
be added:"Provided that the constituencies into which the State
of Assam is divided shall not comprise the Tribal Areas
specified in Part B of the' table apended to paragraph 20 of
the Sixth Schedule"; and
(b) in clause (2), after the words "not included within any
State" the words, letter and figure "and of the Tribal
Areas specified in Part B of the tc.'"Ible appended to
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule" shdl be inserted.
(2) In Article 82, after the words "not included within any State"
the words, letter and figure "and of the Tribal Areas specified
in Part B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth
Schedule" shall be inserted.
(3) In Article 170, after clause (1), the following clause shall be
inserted:"(lA) The co~tituencies *nto which the State of Assam is
divided for the purposes of clause (1) shall not comprise
the Tribal Areas specified in Part B of the table appended
to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule".

..

'

,

.

1..'1

'

'.'
"

"

,

I'

II

.

'.

"

~.' J

h
I

I.

I'

.~

, ,r

..
~,

LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Consvtution of India.

l.

(Shn' Gooind Ballabh Pat,

Minister of Home Affair )

